## Notes (Chapter 5)

1. The account given here, as elsewhere in this volume, is guilty of the all too common fault of Indo-Aryan (North Indian) chauvinism. It does not take into account the antiquity and independence of the culture and literature of Tamil, which distinguished itself as the renmozhi 'southern language' from what it called the vaDamozhi 'northern language' (i.e. Sanskrit, which was not called Sanskrit in classical Tamil, and also fails to note the specificities of the emergence of Malayalam, Telugu, and Kannada as regional languages. I apologize. At the present stage of my research, however, I cannot substantially improve on this account. Perhaps Southern friends reviewing this book will do me the favour of explaining exactly what needs to be corrected in order to make the characterization more balanced.

# Conclusion

## 6.1 Ease

In this chapter we discuss how the H-normative instrument presented in chapter 4, English, serves the purposes of the L rationality of Bharat described in chapter 5 without being able to subvert the processes that are slowly but surely putting India back in touch with its deeper identity as Bharat.

We propose that the relaxed resistance of a nation at ease with itself takes the form of treating its homes as the true and plural centres, defusing the surface centrality of the foci of power. This strategy permits various specialized and ritualized card-kingships of academic disciplines, technical expertises and economic mobilizations to carry on with their manoeuvres. The relaxed nation can reap the harvest from these tense exercises without having to condemn itself to wholesale workaholism. One consequence is that workaholic English is unable to sell its card game, as an 'Indian identity', to a Bharat which refuses to adopt the techno-centric culture that would go with an English-based 'Indian' identity. The cards, however, remain in place—as one form of play in a field of many games.

What distinguishes this Bharat from the Cardland critiqued by Tagore is the plurality of games and the strategy of relaxed resistance to all plurality-destroying forces.

## 6.2 Auntie

It is useful to return, at this point, to the observations made in the introductory chapter about the image of the Auntie tongue.

The themes explored throughout this volume have given us a lot to listen for when we hear the English word Auntie in contemporary India. It is, however, important to notice that our perspective is not the only one which leads to the view that the use of Auntie is a significant fact in the domain of Indian English usage. Using a relatively standard model of socio-linguistic description, a 1988 quantitative study by Kamal K. Sridhar (1989: chapter 8) carried out in Bangalore showed that '"aunty" [...] functions as a marker of Westernized sophistication among the upwardly mobile middle classes in urban and semi-urban India'. Despite her vastly different assumptions and goals, Kamal Sridhar's analysis and ours converge on the same significant fact, indicating that its significance is independent of the frameworks we adopt. Of course, we then diverge again in our interpretations of the phenomenon.

Our own interpretation focuses on the fact that auntie, a kinship term, is used in Indian English for the construction of social affiliations which would, in the Euro-American Anglophone world, normally be constructed in non-organic, abstract terms, indicated by the use of such forms of address as Mrs Burton or Cathy. The use of auntie and uncle in Indian English—overwhelmingly preferred over abstract forms of address, when school-going children, say, are addressing their classmates' parents—is a carry-over from Indian languages. It reflects one aspect of the system that we are calling FESH. This aspect is the use of the model of extended kinship in the construction of broader social networks. A society that makes this the principal model of social affiliation treats the home, or the site where the family is built and sustained, as the formal centre of social institutionality. One consequence is that the normal patriarchal forms of hierarchy within the family are maintained as the prevalent pattern throughout institutional life. Another consequence is the 'ease' we have been alluding to.

That Indian English usage patterns reflect FESH rather than the metropolitan English social alternatives indicates that the Indian social setting in which the language functions treats it as an Auntie Tongue, as a non-member of the family being given the formal position of an Auntie since that is the only available style of constructing an affiliation. If English as a language of identity was really moving in, one would expect its elite users in India to adjust their address habits to metropolitan norms, with the upwardly mobile strata Kamal Sridhar studies following suit. That expectation is not met. We conclude that English is not 'one of us', but an important presence that one must be polite to; and Auntie is the way we express our politeness in our current social conjuncture; so the term 'Auntie Tongue' best expresses what English is to its users in India.

The formality of the kinship hierarchy has properties that may initially seem, but are not, contradictory. On the one hand, it creates a comfort-giving distance between the L-focused generation to which the ego affiliates and the H-focused generation to which it relegates parental and avuncular figures. This distancing is the basis of the ease, the relaxation, the auditory culture described in chapter 5. On the other hand, the fact that it is a formality of the kinship type also means that, unlike the more elaborate formalities that emerge between sharply distinct groups, this formality builds loose networks and defines spatial or temporal niches in terms of prototype-based and fuzzy-edged concepts with fluctuating and negotiable boundaries variably defined by the parties to the negotiation. This underspecification also reinforces the auditory diffuseness of the culture.

The distancing and underspecification properties of the FESH phenomenon carry over from the construction of interpersonal relationships, an obvious extension of the core model of kinship, to the macrosocial level. Institutions and relations between institutions, such as relations between languages in a verbal repertoire, are likewise built in a diffuse style, with distancing and underspecification playing an important role in the patterning.

In particular, English is held at a formal distance from the L level of socio-linguistic structure, and at the same time there are no distinct boundaries sharply and non-negotiably specifying types of English that can be used, domains where they can be used, or syntactic and lexical shibboleths which, if they existed, would uphold the utter separateness of English from the Indian languages. The distance keeps the L level, with its Indian languages, cool and relaxed, unaffected by the tightness of the technicality of English proper. The underspecification ensures that, through negotiation, the superficial and moment-to-moment shares of English and the various other languages and varieties in the Indian mix may wax and wane without anybody having to invest acute and systematic anxiety in particular outcomes, as the outcomes are not as valid or stable as they would have been in a more sharply defined social order, but subject to perpetual renegotiation.

While the particular fortunes of this or that language may vary because of underspecification, the fact of distance between H and L does not. Thus, the distance between English as a donor and the Indian receptor discourses remains stable. English is a stable adjunct to the Indian discursive system.

It may help if this relationship is clarified by means of an analogy. Consider the way a society employs metallurgy. The society as such is a life-pattern involving the days and nights of many individuals of various ages and sexes, etc. The practice of metallurgy, by a few adult males dedicated to that hard profession, involves a taming of the solar heat of high noon in the form of a furnace. This unvarying high noon is a stable adjunct, at a stable distance differentiating its technicality from the cyclical and multiple ordinariness of the social life that employs this adjunct. Likewise, English the technical adjunct remains at a stable distance from, but faithfully serves, the general social life that employs it.

The analogy does not appear to go very far. People stay away from the temperatures of a blast furnace, and keep the furnace at a safe distance from their homes, in order to protect their homes from a heat that would render them uninhabitable. Even if we postulate a corresponding fear of English as too 'hot' for our comfort, perhaps by invoking the McLuhan imagery of hot and cool, we have failed to explain what could possibly make this a stable distancing factor, for everyone knows that fears can disappear. Even if we argue that associated with the English language there is the tightness of naturalism in the sense of section 5.2, and that this must remain stably distinct from the generally loose ambience of South Asia, such an argument is still vulnerable to the counter-claim that the open, equalitarian invitation that this naturalism addresses to tradition-bound hierarchies will ultimately be heeded even in recalcitrant areas like Asia.

Thus, it is important to show that, as the furnace analogy suggests, the point is not that Indians are afraid to receive English truly into their homes and hearts, but that the realities of this language are incompatible with such a reception, making it a non-option.

English is not a space. It is a piece of real estate. Its owners—whose biological identities keep changing, of course, as in the case of any real estate—enforce normative spelling, punctuation, grammar, and phonological and lexical limits (within which accents and dictions may vary) throughout the domains of English discourse. Indian use of English will forever remain a tolerated, degenerate variant of the norm in the eyes of the owners. Hence the striving by Indians to attain near-native command, to count as individuals who may be co-opted into the metropolitan Herrenvolk.

This is why the distance remains stable. Those managers of English in India who represent the wishes of its proprietors are quite strict—and for good structural reasons, independent of their wishes as individuals—about 'maintaining standards' in the most distinctly proprietary domains of orthography and phonology. These screening devices effectively distinguish the few insiders, welcomed into the fold of the managers of English in India, from the many outsiders excluded from this fold. This massive fact, kept in place by factors far more powerful than the voices favouring the demarginalization of creoles and non-standard accents, undermines the naturalistic and equalitarian rhetoric associated with the discourse that the English language carries.

## 6.3 Post-Modernity

We have discussed some of the forces that enable the technical adjunct English to function as a stable adjunct whose operators neither can nor wish to make it really belong to the Indian cultural family. We have not shown that this field of forces has anything to do with modernization. Given our account so far, the scenario might be, for all you know, one of a traditionalizing backlash. It is necessary to ask what type of social formation all this is happening.

Earlier, we characterized the post-modern moment as the point at which modernization takes place at the pleasure of the people. We are now in a position to specify this further and to identify the India which holds English on leash as a post-modern society. The specification involves considering more clearly the idea of the popular ambience of ease controlling the technical system of production, and situating this idea in our context.

We begin with the conceptual part of the task. One obvious question to face is: If the Indian model of modernity treats the family as prototypical and institutions as extensions of kinship, how can this model count as a universalistic, non-exclusive, open model of rationality, as a form of modernization?

The logic of our argument compels us to answer this in terms of two key notions: Production and Use. The basic locus of identity, in our answer, is the network of users of products, not the network of producers (a market-driven hierarchical network of proprietors and managers and workers in the capitalist variant of the Enlightenment or a theory-driven equalitarian association of producers in the socialist variant). The locus of identity, which may thus be called the home, became the cultural base of the social process at the proto-modern moment of the medieval mutation that we have characterized as India's Bhakti-Sufi mutation. It was at that moment that India's field of discourse—if by 'field of discourse' we mean the forces deciding what priorities underwrite the differentiation of speech acts and associated practices into serious (social-division-of-labour-oriented) and casual (individual-life-oriented) ones—moved away from the theoretical and technical H sector, then controlled by Sanskrit and Persian/Arabic, into the L home of the formation of identities, then associated with the emerging regional languages.

Our answer then goes on to say that, in keeping with the narrative form of that recentration, modern India, compelled like any other modernity to reproduce the style of its revolutionary onset, continues to throw up H systems, from which the L-centred publics keep learning (since learning is what the H/L relation is about) how to manage the technical production of goods and services, but towards which these publics maintain a dual stance of admiration and apathy (for the L locus of the public's identity is situated in Use, not Production, and only in the sphere of production does the H discourse carry any weight).

This answer to the question is in a dialogical relation with certain sorts of critique of the Enlightenment that have arisen within the West, especially in the Frankfurt School (whose most recent work, through Habermas and then the critical appropriation of his work by Lele and Singh, informs our conceptual premises). When Adorno and Horkheimer in their 1944/1972 classic proceed from the positivist premise that 'All work and pleasure are protected by the hangman. To contradict this fact is to deny all science and logic' to fascist, centrist, and radical conclusions: 'Various conclusions can be drawn from this—from the grovelling respect for Fascist barbarity to refuge in the circles of Hell. But there is another conclusion: to laugh at logic if it runs counter to the interests of men' (pp. 217-18), they move beyond a purely Western critique of the mainstream of Western-style development to the undefined region of a laughter that challenges a rationality defined in terms of the technical categories of production alone. The Indian style as we envision it works out the counter-logic of such laughter.

In the Indian style, you do set up an H rationality which runs the systems of labour for production and which obeys the straight logic of the Enlightenment, with the disastrous consequences Adorno and Horkheimer outline; but you withhold assent and keep yourself based in the L rationality of the real norms that make you tick, and you reserve the right to sit in your L home and laugh at the workaholic logic of the H grimness which you practise in the tense phase of your cycle but which you refuse to take seriously in the relaxed and therefore decisive phase. (Recall our remarks on cycles in chapter 5.)

Less informally, the Indian model of social life and historical narrativization defines its basic terms or carries out its fundamental negotiations in the arena of the relational core of the cultural system. In this arena, kinship expands into and underwrites such larger formations as caste or community. The relational core creates and sustains the identities of those selves whose enjoyments and dismissals define the qualities of products (goods and services) in terms of which the economic system may be said to 'use' or 'consume' them. This space is situated in the countryside, crucially including the small towns which articulate the consciousness of rurality, and not in the large cities whose material and cultural production processes have more to do with the external world in general and the metropolitan (First World) countries in particular. From this space of basic selves come the processes of othering which confer otherness on the world of production, the insane rhythms of labour sustaining an irrational industrialization in a torrid climate, the mostly inappropriate products emanating from that set of systems, the largely mendacious informative and distributive discourse (including both self-proclaimed advertising or propaganda and discourses claiming to be news or analysis) which serves to make these products acceptable to the purchasing classes, and the principal discourse—associated most closely with the English language—which runs this workplace and declares it to be 'rational'.

These processes of othering acknowledge, of course, that in the segment where the writ of English runs, there is indeed a coherent logic at work. They do not directly undermine this logic, which is the logic of exchange value, the logic of the quantitative measurement of commodities (and of the substances in terms of which scientific theories analyze them so that technology can turn the analysis around and come up with new syntheses for production), a logic which underlies the positivist self-destruction of the Enlightenment lucidly portrayed by Adorno and Horkheimer. Instead, the processes of othering, which confine this logic to the marketplace and which uphold the constitutive privilege of the home as the site of serious valuation by the self, end up setting in motion a counter-logic of use value which goes beyond all types of Marxism, even the Frankfurt School type, to the extent that it liberates the concept of use value from the form of valuation of production as an absolute of human existence. In Marxism, which is at best an internal critique of the Enlightenment, the concepts of labour and production are coextensive with the theory of human life. In a world-view where theory as well as labour and production pertain only to the wakeful segment of a day-night cycle (a cycle also including the twilight of fantasy and the night of prediscursive human rootedness in nature), in a world-view where practice is geared not only to the satisfaction of rationally cognizable needs and desires but also to the spontaneities of a differentiated but continuous spectrum of pleasures (ranging from the diffuse comfort one feels in a well-balanced cyclical life to the acute satisfactions derivable from the charging and discharging of tensions in sports and other forms of rigorous use of labour time), it becomes clear that use value, the domain of pleasure as a whole, is a relaxed, circumambient countryside ambiguously related to the overdeveloped closure of the city it surrounds, the city where commodities are laboriously produced and exchanged.

How can the popular ambience of ease or relaxation check the inherent tendency of the relentless abstract logic of the city to extend itself to all parts of the social fabric? It is not as hard as it sounds. The city, in the abstract sense in which we postulate the category of the city as embodying wakefulness and workaholism, is the technical. The city is mobilization, for technical terms are simply ordinary words pressed into military service, or jail, or some other form of unnatural rigour. The city is a total causality postulate, where every effect has a cause and vice versa, for all nooks and crannies of labour time have to be accounted for. It is the relaxed arena of life that understands this and in so understanding distances itself from the athletic games which constitute the city. Relaxation is not the absence of work, but the absence of the tense desire to conquer, the absence of that exploitative relationship with space and time which both of the industrial ideologies, Marxism and capitalism, describe as labour. Consequently, the relaxed popular ambience of normal work understands both itself and its workaholic city-bred antonym Labour, and is able to hold the latter in check not by denying or dismissing its prowess but by allocating to such athletics the niche of a game in the ecology of play.

We turn now to the situative part of our task. How is the above an answer to the question of whether we are speaking of a mode of open modernity or of a reactionary backlash? It is an answer in that it narrates the way the development of the Indian style has been shaped in interaction with the Western Enlightenment. The Indian model identifies persons whose theoretical systems come crashing down; and, on the other hand, freedom emerges.

The next question is, if this Indian style we speak of is a genuinely post-modern one, why do our formulations of the model appeal to the Sanskrit stuff at all? Why the Vaakyapadiya in chapter 4, why the four-age cycle in chapter 5?

The 'Sanskrit stuff' (as a reader capable of asking such a question might sardonically comment) was the tool India gave up on Sanskrit and other classical languages in the ancient world when it wired itself into the linked discourse of technical causalities to the marketplace today, but continued to redirect its regularities to special, classically expressible areas of life. In our time these are necessarily very different in content from the normative discourses of earlier ages; it is in the Sanskrit normativities, pertaining to the systematic causalities we press into productive service, that this country tends to offer its most widely visible textual articulations of thought or fancy. Hence, for instance, twentieth century India's massive analytical-discursive output in English, making this country one of the most voluminous publishers in that language. Our L does not stifle its H; we are proud of our athletes. But that is not our life, and is (in terms of the substance of what it expresses) only one sector of our articulate work. Independent India's expressive selfhood has been coming into its own (in the form of Bharat) in Indian languages—a point one cannot make in more detail except by listing many Indian-language masterpieces of art (including literature), criticism, and analysis whose level has seldom or never been approached by any twentieth-century work in English, a listing which would look out of place in a book like this, written at the H level. For the standard games we play depend on the assumption that such masterpieces cannot exist. Given the rules of writing in the kind of English this book is written in, and given the phenomenally limited willingness and ability of readers of books like this to do serious reading (or language-conscious film-viewing) in Indian languages, it is clear that readers who may say they would like us to substantiate our point here do not really expect us to do so.

At the present juncture, the country is indeed passing through what the media see as a fundamentalist phase. But the nature of this problem is frequently misrepresented. It is in fact a pathology of urban modernity, not of the circumambient post-modernity that keeps it in check. Our fundamentalism arises from the classical status of English in this country. Only an offshoot of Indian fundamentalism, acting through the discursive and ideological agencies of the English-oriented sectors of our life, seeks to appropriate the Sanskritic glory of ancient India in what the media regard as 'fundamentalist' terms.

Everybody agrees, conceptually, that the central feature of fundamentalism is the emphasis on literal adherence to a definite corpus of scriptures and practices, with an absolute surrender of spontaneity to the tyranny of the forms prescribed by that corpus. Now, even cursory inspection shows that in this sense (and I am not aware of any other) the real fundamentalism in this country is the fundamentalist style of adherence to the other-defined body of modern sciences, humanities, and ideological systems and to the rigorous practices associated with these disciplines, including the austere practice of appearing to criticize the scriptures but remaining within the narrow limits of legitimate commentary. In particular, only the domain of our reception of modern donor discourses exemplifies the sharply bounded Judaeo-Christian type of permanent settlement as to what group of texts (depending on our maarga and our iShta devata—the Marxist classics, or British liberalism, or structuralism, or econometrics) we shall count as embodying the true doctrine around which we shall reorganize the rest of our thinking. Thus it is clear that when some modern Indian political tendencies seek to codify a unique Hinduism that we can be fundamentalist about, they are only applying the deeper fundamentalism of our mode of reception of modern ideas (whose modernity such reception scripturizes and destroys) to the Sanskrit part of our archive, producing a superficial fundamentalism that contrasts with our overall surrender to modern scriptures and thus becomes visible even to hasty analysts like our media people. In other words, the fundamentalist pathology of our country is not located in one little fascist sector of the polity that one might dismiss as organized Hindu chauvinism; it is spread all over the ideological system and is reinforced every time a leading left-wing intellectual, supposedly trying to combat it, invokes History, Evidence, and other divine figures of particular modern scriptures without trying to do anything to undermine the culture of scriptures.

The real question that the argument of this book faces, then, is not why we are flirting with 'fundamentalism' by indulging in Sanskrit talk, but rather whether the manner of our Sanskrit talk (as well as the rest of our discourse) is in keeping with the authentic, anti-fundamentalist tradition of the L-centred Bharatiya appropriation of H material, or participates in the 'modern' Indian surrender to the Western missionary paradigm, a paradigm that requires that the free and truly modern learning processes of the community be stifled by the systematic teaching and 'modern' behaviour control technologies whereby the missionaries inflict a theoretical-practical package deal on the natives, a paradigm which thus gladly brings about a scenario where books and technologies can become the mainstay of a totalitarian takeover of life. The source of real fundamentalism is not the intellectual laziness of the L discourses, but the anti-intellectual workaholic addictions of the H ones, and the question is whether we have been able to overcome at least part of this problem in the present discourse.

Since this discourse is in English and forms part of the scene it describes, there is no doubt that we belong to the pathology we are trying to diagnose, and that thus this text is vulnerable to the usual forms of banter with which critics greet manifestations of such a predicament. However, we do have at least a theoretical answer to the question of how we can fight our way out of complicity with the Anglo-American-managed fundamentalism besetting Indian 'modernity', even if the practice of this book may have failed to implement adequately what this answer preaches. The answer is as follows.

Fundamentalism is the most straightforward reading of the missionary paradigm, a type of reading that says the desirable H model must be adopted directly by the subject population, and that this adoption, plus the concomitant literal translations into the native languages, must be supervised by a rigorous church of experts. The way many of us avoid the extremity of this reading, and thus manage to come up with a self-image of non-fundamentalism (making it possible to look down on the benighted chauvinist souls who suffer from that vice), is to try a more liberal reading of the missionary paradigm. Such readings usually say the desirable H model must be adapted to the circumstances of the subject population, and that this adaptation, plus the concomitant appropriate or pragmatic translations into the native languages, must be monitored by several overlapping rigorous churches of experts. Our readers, even those unconvinced by our argument, have probably noticed that we believe neither in the strict and monistic paternalism of the adoptionist type nor in the loose and pluralistic avuncularism of the adaptationist type. We are implacably opposed to any endorsement of the efforts by the many illiterates (who refuse to learn how to listen, and who are complacently imprisoned in their disciplinary specializations which apparently prevent them from listening and attaining basic literacy about the communities of India) to tell the Indian people how to live. Our focus has been on how the people of this country learn from the various H discourses whose decorative arrogance the country puts up with, how this learning style has remained independent of the theories of the teachers, and how this style of social learning, rooted in our medieval recasting of the classical textuality in a new mode, amounts to a globally usable practice of serious modernity in the sense of dialogicality. In pursuing this emphasis, we have been led to explore the topology of serious or substantive modernity, and thus implicitly to set aside the naive geometry of the adoptionist (strict fundamentalist) version as well as the projective geometry of the adaptationist (loose fundamentalist) version of the missionary paradigm. The point is that geometry seeks congruence between the H original and the L copy, while projective geometry seeks a suitable bending of the H model to fit the L habitat; our approach is to focus not on the formal shape of what H donates to L but on the paths along which L's taking flows and thus about the substantive topology of what sorts of acceptance/welcoming follow the natural tendencies of L's own development/pleasure.

In a nutshell, we are saying that modernity, if it is synonymous with openness and universalizability, requires a transition from the naive or projective geometry of copying the West to a serious and as yet unexplored topology of paths along which the plural and polygenetic modernities all over the world can bring their heterogeneous flows into synch with each other; that fundamentalism is a pathology arising from the pressure of the H discourse trying to impose its geometry and to stifle the independent pleasure of the L-centred communities (such stifling often includes programmes of substituting addictive pleasures controlled by the terms of the H discourse); that the real fundamentalism is of English, not of Sanskrit; and that our theoretical reading of the Bharatiya practice of true modernity is a strike against the fundamentalism represented by those readers who think that the touch of Sanskrit pollutes.

Having responded to the charge of flirting with reaction and fundamentalism, we shall now complete the task of situating the account in our context. Recall, from the Introduction's discussion of the song about the hanging of the juvenile terrorist Khudiram, that in that song the colonized Indian protagonist tells his mother-land, in a gesture of affectionate pique, that ten months later he will be reborn in Auntie's home, with noose-marks on his throat so that Mother can recognize him. We are now ready, at the end of our varied listenings, to return to that text, to find what we can hear.

He has indeed been reborn, our listening tells us, in the home of the techno-instrumental normativity which is cast as Auntie in the Indian drama and is married to Uncle Sam's global power. And his throat does indeed bear noose-marks, not only as a colonial legacy from the last incarnation but even in token of his present existence as a telephonic extension of the Western Exchange. For he finds himself hanging from a loose end of the wiring of the West. This loose end leaves him suspended between Anglo-America's ownership of English and native-language-speaking Bharat's inaccessibility to the English-medium Indian (for the English-medium ambience teaches its products—what a felicitous word!—that learning how to write Bharatiya languages at a serious discursive-analytical level is 'not done', 'bad form', an unspeakably barbaric option).

Not a predicament that offers what I would call prospects. But our reborn hero seems to like the noose-marks and shows signs of being pleased with the quirks of his condition. Perhaps this is because he not only shares the Anglo-American sense of amusement at all things Indian, but self-critically finds his own position genuinely ironic. If so, his humour is in unconscious complicity with that of Bharat, which also finds him comical but usable, albeit a bit of a dead end. (Remember, in our book Bharat is the User and the Indian steeped in English is the prototypical Exchangeable Product.) In that case, there remains a possibility of the two humours flowing together into a new form of life, perhaps under a very different Indian and global linguistic skyscape. May that form of life be strong enough and rich enough to know how to retroactively bless the dead ends that our generation continues to celebrate in the same spirit in which our intellectuals continue to smoke themselves to death—the spirit of the Enlightenment, fiercely celebrating total light and H wakefulness without L shadow, addicted to workaholism and unable to turn the game around even at the dialectical point at which the fire of technique begins to turn the dream of work into ashes.

## 6.4 Retelling

This is an attempt to retell the story of this book. As in any retelling, both abbreviation and restatement are involved.

Our argument begins by putting the main question like this: What does English in India mean and signify?

This conjunctive framing creates a space within which the vehicle of planning emerges. Notice that the vehicle of this planning, throughout, has been English as a language of technical expertise. The rest of the things we find ourselves discussing are not the central content of the language; they are peripheral to the driving concern of the language as a vehicle of professional, technical planning. Several important points which are not made here but which are clearly relevant to the larger intellectual scene would be examined fully elsewhere, of course. But if you do consider that issue in this perspective, the wording makes it clear at once that only to the extent that a serious language-user community, free from the tyranny of a U.S.-centric culture that stymies serious dialogue (imposing various techno-cultural constraints) can determine the course of linguistic innovation, does the vehicle carry multiple and interactive meanings to its drivers. The question is multi-directional, approaching the phenomenon from different directions at the same time. First of all, it expresses the role of English as an adjunct in the communicative network of such regions. Second, it shows that the language is not an open, neutral range of possibilities of saying what anybody likes, but is a going business of some people having said certain sorts of things before, creating patterns that their successors may renew or modify some of the themes. What they have said in a language weighs down the entire vehicle and creates a gravitational field that affects what you or I may want to do with that language.

Planning renews the theme of instrumentality and provides it with the national developmental context. The rationality of Indian development, shaped mainly by Nehru but also by the Ambedkar-led effort to inject the American spirit of impersonal justice and due process into the new republic's formative principles, has taken an American form in the specific sense that we have tried to import the activist ethos of a public socio-economic experiment directly shaping where the nation is going and indirectly defining our personal identities in terms of how we orient ourselves towards this national enterprise. The consequent surrender to experts who are supposed to tell the nation what to do to make its dreams come true has meant that the categories and conventions of legal, scientific, industrial, and other analytical-technical registers of English have overwhelmed the aesthetics of literature in the Indian use of this vehicular language. An India under British tutelage might have referred its English to what was constructed as a Shakespearean base. But our India, following the lead of a nation whose maxim has been 'The business of America is business', runs its English along pragmatic-utilitarian lines.

English, the name of the language, is our next key word. Anglo-American ownership of what may be called the copyright of the language is expressed by the fact that the language is sometimes, slightly whimsically but with no sense of illegitimacy, called the American Language when it is used in the United States; but no one has ever proposed Australian or New-Zealandese or Canadian as names for the forms the language has taken in those other speech communities where English is the first language. Only the central name English and the slightly eccentric but licit name American have gained currency for this language. The forces that keep this fact in place have not been and are not being contested. You and I may coin a new expression for our private games in the language; but our coinage will not be part of the language unless and until it is taken up by the entire speaking community. (A linguistic theorist of significant stature whose use of the imagery of coinage had remained a vital presence in theoretical linguistics—such as core linguistics (built around generative grammar) and related fields of enquiry—a relevant discipline, which hovers on the science-arts boundary, describes the ordinary notion of language, which he describes as a teleological-normative notion, lies outside the domain of scientific explication.) Our position in this book is that a language is an image and not a concept. The image is clearest among native speakers whose proto-typical usage gives a centre from which all other usages move away from that centre. The image controls what people feel to be right and wrong. Non-native speakers, being far from the centre, are insecure about their intuitions. If, as in the community of Indian English users, there emerges a notion of correctness defined by a hybrid object, call it Indian English. But the insecurity remains, not just as a subjective feeling but as an objective discursive dependency. The mainsprings of the creativity that constitutes English, renews its slang and sense of innovation from one generation to the next, draw on the Anglophone canons and evaluations, and necessarily brush against inappropriate Anglophone ones as a basis for the socialization of English-medium school-children in India. This fact is explicable on the basis of the view that a language is an image and thus, unlike a conceptual system such as mathematics, unavailable for neutral universal use independent of the identity of the community where it originated.

The key word technical connotes a general mobilization of means to achieve systematically defined ends. We have seen that the presence of English in India is built around its essential technical-legal-scientific registers. The machinery enabling some Indians to use 'nativelike' English to speak to each other is also an intricate social technology of resistance to the corrupting Indian influences and an inter-cultural technology of continual pumping of contemporary Anglo-American idiom and mores into the Indian elite. Thus, the presence of the language in this country is a matter of keeping a standing army of English words in a state of constant readiness, wearing combat gear. When you are wearing combat gear, you cannot relax, and the arts of relaxation, including a creativity that is in touch with your community's cultural unconscious, are denied to you. Thus the enthusiastic academic community of Indian English authors has been unable to experience the inwardness of genuine creative writing and therefore has produced no reflections on the predicament of such creators in the modern world, no contributions to the theory of literary analysis stemming from such an inwardness. However, this community has done very well in the domain of translating from Indian languages into English, which includes the enterprise of independent renarration in English of fictional or analytical narratives from this culture. The community has also produced a rich body of insightful commentary on the successful experience of such translation and renarration. This is in keeping with our hypothesis, for translation and retelling are technical jobs and perfectly compatible with being in combat uniform. If the critical commentary on Indian writing in English stops treating original work as its centre—producing desperate and theoretically dishonest formulations in a bid to save face which handicap the entire field—and begins to see that such writing is a form of preparation and follow-through surrounding the act of translation and renarration, the way a bowler's run-up and follow-through in cricket are related to the actual release of the ball, then it is possible to rethink original Indian writing in its English as an ancillary to the more serious translation-renarration work.

The word retelling is the quintessential contemporary language of expertise in India associated in standard histories with Bhakti and Sufism, at which mode, and is very hard to summarize conceptually. We would like to think of the Auntie Tongue image as a compressed presentation of the upshot of the analysis. English the teacher is adopted by the politeness sets up for guests and acquaintances who are not regarded as members of the family, and the conceptual notes that must be fresh in the reader's memory since they were mentioned at the end of section 6.3 should be recycled here.

Among the voices that ring out from those Indian contexts which our analysis describes, many important points which are of truly general interest may be of truly general interest. The consequence is that our readers are now likely to be led by the proponents of a frank hegemony of the Hindu majority. These groups differ from the centrist political forces of our day which also present themselves as upholding some version of national tradition, but they differ from the centrists only in the relatively minor detail of the choice of scriptural texts and in their degree of fundamentalism (on which see section 6.3). One's theoretical hopes that the left might improve on the centrist conception of modernity and development or that the right might improve on the centrist conception of this nation's tradition and identity are belied by the timid and illiterate material we are fed not only by the parties of the left or the right but even by the supposedly well-read and thoughtful intellectuals who serve them. This behaviour on the part of the politicians and the intelligentsia of a nation full of talent and intellect becomes easy to understand, to forgive, and eventually to overcome if you agree with this book's thesis that our national consensus on letting experts run the development process has led us all to surrender our discourse to English as the language of expertise, and has eclipsed the serious national discourses—which nonetheless continue to take place at the regional level, in the regional languages, in accordance with dialogical conventions which are deep-rooted in the history of Indian discourse which our official theories have remained incapable of taking cognizance of, because our standard conception of development has forced us to surrender not only our freedom but even the language of our thought to the workaholic frenzy that passes for modernity. I do not doubt that it will be possible to undo this eclipse and to reverse our sell-out to the technical, and that many of us who are serving the machine will know when and how to rebel, and how to deploy parts of the mobilized array against the category of mobilization itself.

