# Discourses

## 2.1 Overcoming the H/Archaic

Towards the end of section 1.1 of chapter 1, we note that, to the limited and tactical extent that we wish to retain the assumption (standard in the diglossia literature) that diglossic communities in the classical period of modernization must commit themselves to a process of overcoming the diglossic cleavage of the old type (sidelining the H/Archaic code and pushing forward the L/Contemporary code), our point is that in today’s post-modern phase of modernization the main struggle is against the forces encouraging H/Foreign to spill over into L/Authentic.

In order to clarify that remark, the present section takes up the task of articulating our reasons for retaining that assumption only to a limited, tactical extent. We argue that the language politics embodying the assumption that a natural language can come into its own only by carrying out the revolutionary overthrow of an Archaic oppressor code, and the naturalist linguistics corresponding to such a politics, form part of the structuralist configuration which must be reread critically in order for our present-day thinking to be able to make serious use of it.

We situate our discussion vis-a-vis a language manifesting overt diglossia—Bangla. Throughout the twentieth century, this case of diglossia has stimulated discussion and, on the part of those who viewed it as dysfunctional, remedial action (see Singh and Maniruzzaman 1983 for a detailed study).

At the turn of the century Pramatha Chaudhuri, with support from Rabindranath Tagore and other major authors, launched a movement to promote the Chalit or informal code as a written standard and to let the Saadhu or formal code die a natural death.' The movement rapidly placed Chalit Bangla in the position of hegemonic power that was sought for it. This socio-linguistic development was one of the most visible aspects of the cultural modernization of Bengal in the twentieth century.

The leader of the initiative that spearheaded this development, the author and editor Pramatha Chaudhuri, argued that it represented the formal dimension of the self-mobilization of Bengal as a national entity. Writing in 1913, and referring explicitly (p. 250) to the political background of the partition of Bengal by Curzon in 1905 (which had led to the successful 1905-8 nationalist movement against that partition, a movement which stoked what were soon to become the flames of the struggle for Indian independence), Chaudhuri argued:

Nowadays the spoken language of Bengali gentlemen from all areas of Bengal—northern, southern, eastern, western—is converging. What remains is some minor variation of accent. Just as the form of the written language imitates the spoken language, so also the speech of the educated people imitates the written language. Through these processes the southern variety of Bangla, which has gradually become a literary medium, is also bringing about by its own force a unification of the speech of the educated classes. I have said above that in my opinion the colloquial language of Calcutta will be the future medium of literature. For Calcutta, the capital, brings together innumerable educated gentlemen from all parts of Bengal. In that single city, all Bengal has found a centre. And the new language which representatives of the Bengali nation from all areas are building through collective intercourse is an integral Bangla language. The speech of the villages on which Calcutta was based has been restricted to the uneducated classes of the city. The language of modern Calcutta is that of the Bengali nation, while the patois of the old Calcutta is merely an urban cockney [cockney in English in the original] (1913/1968: 254 (tr. mine, here and elsewhere in this chapter).

It is clear from this passage that Chaudhuri saw the development as involving essentially the ‘educated classes’ and that this was a natural process. His leadership of the movement principally took the form of editing a new periodical whose title, Sobuj pOttro ‘Green Leaf’ (playing on the polysemy of the word pOttro ‘leaf; letter (epistle); periodical’), made an emphatic statement about the livingness of the Chalit or L code of Bangla, and the correspondingly moribund or dead character of the archaic Saadhu or H code. Chaudhuri was quite self-conscious about the vitalist ideology that the title expressed. In an article called Sobuj pOttro in the first issue of Sobuj pOttro (repr. 1914b/1968: 31-33), he wrote, invoking the natural form of Sarasvati (the goddess of speech, music and learning, in the Hindu pantheon):

That the grass-green beauty of the Sarasvati of Bangla eludes our eye is not our fault, but stems from our education. The temple of logos today is the school. Our mentors and elders have established there such solid and inert idols of white stone, clad in white, that our minds, through daily physical and verbal service to them, have become sapless and moribund . . . . Our education has implanted firmly in our mind the bizarre belief that our selves, our own personalities, are so horrible that it is better to imitate and die than to be ourselves [Chaudhuri’s rhetorical effect here depends on familiarity with the traditional Sanskrit line ‘svadharme nidhanaM Sreyah paradharma bhaya-avahah’ ‘It is better to die as yourself than to take a path not your own, which is horrible’]. Therefore in word and deed, in reading and writing, we are always eager to stifle the energetic flow of our own minds. The reason for this is clear: we know that what is green is unripe in both good and bad senses.

We hope that the green will gradually mature and become red. But the green sap in our inner being today will grow into tomorrow's red blood only if we discover and energetically cultivate our own selves. That is why, instead of a Sarasvati idol made of ancient Indian or modern Western stone, we want to establish an earthen jar of our own soil in the literary temple of Bengal and to place there, and breathe life into, a green leaf

This passage shows that Chaudhuri’s ideology links the rise of L not only with ascendant nationalism but even with natural life itself, which is being held hostage by the forces artificially perpetuating the irrational imitation of the past, and which only the youth can set free. Chaudhuri’s wife's uncle Rabindranath Tagore, in the inaugural poem published in the same (first) issue of Sobuj pOttro (Baisakh 1321, Ap 1914), contributes to the same discourse:

O intense youth, o unripe force of life,/O green, impatient, passionate ones, / Raise the half-dead to the light of storm and strife./Let everybody tell you what they please;/Get drunk on the dawn’s glowing energies,/Drown carping quibbles in your boisterous breeze/And dance to the burst of drum and fife!/O youth, o unripe force of life!

It is instructive for us to compare this rhetoric with that of Ferdinand de Saussure, who was speaking at the same time of his theory of language as an assemblage of arbitrary signs and stressing the fact that it was the life of society that sustained these signs as norms of what he called the langue. Saussure thus expressed the idealization of a society as a theoretically homogenizable collectivity, which corresponded to the nationalist idealization that acknowledged but chose to ignore the fact that the bourgeoisie, which identified its own growing homogeneity and solidarity with that of the national community as a whole, was only a privileged part of that community. By the same token, Saussure presented the normativity of the langue as theoretically a history-free conventionality. In his idealization, the norms of the langue count as the specific formal choices which society makes in the process of exercising its freedom and distinguishing itself from other societies; this self-specification by the society gives rise to Saussure’s Arbitrariness.

When we take a closer look at the metaphors at work in this conceptualization, we find that a society is viewed as having a collective will, and as making a choice which is unconscious and which logically precedes and founds the possibility of rational thought on the part of individuals who are constituted by the society as its members. The metaphors underwriting this model of individual rationality based on social pre-rationality also underlie the nationalism of the core period of modernization. Sudipto Kaviraj pointed out to me (in 1989) the conceptual link between nationalism and rationality. The nationalist consensus of the early twentieth century assumed that, ideally, the world should be divided, along basically ethnic lines (the principle of ‘self-determination, with the ethnic group as a collective self big enough to do the determining), into separate and equal nations; and that each nation, so constituted, should collectively and rationally govern itself through a centralized national system of political representation— free from external domination and from the internal irrationality of the past. In practice, it is clear that bourgeois leadership is to underpin the illusion of a national collective will and that, language-wise, the standard speech of the ‘gentlemen’, as Pramatha Chaudhuri puts it, is to count as the ‘natural’ self-expression of the nation, from which the archaism of the written record and the alienness of the dominant foreign language depart in two different irrational and artificial directions.

We are now in a position to see clearly that the naturalist politics of language in Chaudhuri, who wished to overthrow the Archaic oppressor code in favour of a ‘natural’ Bangla, and the naturalist linguistics in Saussure, whose structuralism emphatically upheld the reality of speech and set aside the artificiality of writing, belong not only in time but in logic to the same structuralist configuration.

Any serious relation between present-day thought and that configuration will have to rest on a critical rethinking of the shared world-view from which naturalist language politics and structural linguistics stemmed.

## 2.2 Situating Naturalism

We may begin the critical task by taking the standpoint of our period. In what way is the characteristic vision of our times different from the period of centralistic nationalism? Perhaps the main difference is that today’s ethos, both in linguistics and in general social thinking, is pluralistic. We reject the idea that the individual is a receptacle for what the rationally centralizable nation may put into him or her. As this need to write ‘him or her’ illustrates, we no longer view the nation as a unit whose freedom with respect to other units of the same rank is the most important issue on our agenda. For us, the nation today is not a political unity, but a social fragmentation—a domain deeply divided and stratified. The question of freedom today is that of groups and categories within the nation so understood. One no longer invests ‘selfhood’ in the

It is easy to see what specific form the general view outlined here takes in the linguistic sciences. Core linguistics, or what has more perspicuously been called micro-linguistics, has been trying to find an explicit formulation of the individual speaker's freedom to construct actively, rather than receive passively, his or her ability to speak in tune with the other minds in the environment (to speak ‘the language of the community’). On a different track, socio-linguists have been concerned with issues arising from the social version of the individual's active and spontaneous desire to participate in constituting the forms of the social order. The overt signals of upwardly mobile strata were first noticed in Labov’s research in the form of the hypercorrection phenomenon. Certain limits to what might otherwise, to a liberal eye, look like optimally distributed opportunities for such mobility became apparent in the work of Basil Bernstein on what might be called the cognitive counterpart to diglossia, and on its social basis. Fishman looked at immigrants and other minorities and found that a group looking for a firm and politically viable cultural identity has to either accept, or bring into being by language planning, a standard language for formal use.

These are just some examples. The image of the individual as an active, restless, upwardly mobile being, not held hostage by any unitary national interest, willing to create or reaffirm a specific self-perception by setting a small group identity over against the more encompassing domain of the nation, clearly dominates the scene in the linguistic sciences. What is important to the micro-linguist is that the individual's linguistic creativity is a general human heritage and precedes the possibility of accepting any artificially centralized national heritage or patrimony. The familiar Chomskyan characterization of the language faculty in terms of Universal Grammar is one of the clearest expressions of this motif which is shared by most other theories of micro-linguistics.

But our period's sequel to the social and linguistic content of naturalism, while it plays up the sub-national and plays down the national, need not be seen as entirely cancelling the structuralist legacy. The new vision sets limits to the functional domain of the naturalist paradigm in a broader theoretical and practical space. In order to see how to formulate these limits explicitly, we need to situate the paradigm in relation to what preceded it. For structuralism itself, in its period of initial ascendancy, did a similar job of limiting the functional domain of historical linguistics. If we understand what happened then, it may become easier for us to see what has been happening now.

The paradigm which structuralism replaced, historicism, is often thought of as a period which thematized history and as contrasting with the structuralist and post-modern periods which sideline history. A more helpful approach to the problem may be to take all three paradigms as focusing on historicity, but on different levels of postulated subjectivity for the history. Thus, we may say that the linguistic sciences of our times tell the present-day story or history of the individual and of those sub-national groups or categories, such as women, in relation to which individual identity tends to be constructed. Likewise, structuralism concerned itself with the (also synchronic or present-day) history of the idealized nation, history at the level of newspaper headline decisions made by the collective political system constituting the nation as an actor on the world stage. This perspective would say that historical linguistics had tried to narrate the past history of a quasi-mythical Volk as a carrier of the organic unity of language as a life-form.

It is then the subject of the history that varies in size—the Volk in the nineteenth century, the modern nation in the early twentieth, and the ascendant individual (and his or her support systems) today. In each case, linguistics is concerned with a narrative. If Saussure insists that modern linguistics is basically synchronic, and if all subsequent scholars have inherited this insistence that synchronic description precedes everything else, this is because the narrative of the present has a vastly smaller time scale than the epic histories the historicists had been trying to write. Thus, our century’s basic stories look non-historical and therefore synchronic to an eye brought up on the life-spans of the Indo-European and Semitic families.

Assuming the legitimacy of the generalization that all types of linguistics narrate a story, we may turn to the way in which structuralism restricted the historicist narrative without quite replacing it. A nation cannot live without a history. It may merely wish to live outside the obsessive shadow of the lingering embodiments of its past. The modern democratic order pushes its archaic opponents into a dusty corner which it does not mind allocating for museum storage. Accordingly, Saussure the modern neogrammarian was by no means proposing to stop studying the history of languages. His suggestion was that the associative links between (simple and composite) signs that hold a language together are present-day mental forces of the same variety that triggers analogic change; thus, the study of the purely historical force of sound change must be regulated by and relativized to a primarily synchronic and semiotic study of functioning language systems. This study was supposed to tame and familiarize change.

In structuralism, the basic strategy of this taming of change is to reduce change to the problem of the past and to familiarize the past by emphasizing that it used to be a present. In the structuralist drama, the national speech of the present overcomes its awe of the artificial power of writings from the past by saying to the latter with a new naturalist confidence, ‘You merely represent, with distortions, what was once another speech as natural as that of the present; go and live in an old age home’.

This move served to contain the force of the historicist vision of language as an evolving organicity. Structuralism intended to retain and strengthen the historical enterprise, to which its major practitioners were committed. The point was to relativize this historicity to the crucial naturalness of present-day speaking and its autonomous societal narrative, set in the tacit context of ascendant nationalism.

These remarks represent at least one possible reading of the place of structuralism in the chronicle of linguistics.

## 2.3 Restricting Structuralism

To complete our critical task, we need to do to the structuralist legacy what they had done to their predecessors. We can hope at most to tame and restrict the structural-national principle, without expecting to supersede it entirely. Structuralism had proposed a methodologically careful restatement, as in the work of Hoenigswald (1960), of the content of linguistic change theory. Likewise, the paradigm that follows structuralism, which has remained nameless and insufficiently self-conscious, will eventually have to offer a sophisticated reformulation of the theory of ‘languages’ understood as emblems of particular nations, or of other regionally specified communities.

We cannot afford to let our new attention to pluralism and decentralization quite obscure the readily identifiable and still psychologically real corelike properties of those national or community-wide norms which earlier nationalisms used to appeal to, with much success. These norms will retain an irreducible core of appeal and obviousness (power) in the foreseeable future, as long as common-sense (ideology) continues to categorize speech networks in terms of discrete languages. But we must freely, from the standpoint of our contemporary knowledge, reconstitute a theory of languages that ‘expresses the old insights but reworks them, drawing new limits that give them a definite place in a broader linguistics.

One way to implement the idea of constructing a more inclusive theory, in the domain of diglossia research, is to continue the structuralists’ struggle against hegemony. Suppose we view Saussure’s valorization of speech over writing in a wider historical context as a form of resistance, focusing on an issue suitable to his period, against the hegemonic appropriation of the reality of language by its written standard representation. On this reading of the content of structuralism, we can take up the struggle against hegemony where Saussure left off. Thus, we must identify and correct the covert hegemonic elements in the structuralist enterprise itself, for instance by resisting that natural patrimonialism (with a speech-based image) which structuralism sought to substitute for the older worship of the literary heritage.

The question now is to how we are to simultaneously resist the sanctification of some embodiment of a language (as its most real representation) and construct a positive theory of languages which entails and yet goes beyond the commonsense classification of speech networks in terms of languages.

One answer is made available by Singh and Maniruzzaman (1983). They argue, on the basis of a quantitative study, that the Bangladeshi population exhibits a preference for shifting towards a situation where the L Standard of Bangla, Chalit, will displace the H Standard, Saadhu, and will take over as the new H standard, vacating the L slot for a Dacca-Mymensingh-based regional variety that is evolving towards spoken standard status. Singh and Maniruzzaman recommend language planning measures that will ensure a smooth transition to such a state of affairs.

The contrast with the rhetoric of Sobuj pOttro is interesting. Where the movement led by Chaudhuri claimed to launch a revolution eliminating the duality of norms but in fact proposed (without saying so) that power be handed over to the ‘natural’ bourgeoisie, Singh and Maniruzzaman frankly expect that the transition will replace one diglossia by another, and will promote the Chalit or older L norm to the H norm slot, leaving the L norm slot to be occupied by the emergent Bangladeshi spoken standard based on the Dacca and Mymensingh dialects (see Van der Wurff 1989 for some work on this standard and for remarks on its status as an emergent standard).

It is not enough, however, to note this contrast. We have to understand it. Why do Singh and Maniruzzaman not feel any need to conceal or apologize about the fact that the duality of norms is being reproduced?

The crucial point is their commitment to the language planning perspective. Language planners take it for granted that a speech network as heterogeneous as the Bangla-speaking community of Bangladesh will want to set up some written and spoken norm for national communication, and will accept some formal distance between this standard and the more relaxed norm of the area surrounding the capital, Dacca (a privileged dialect, for obvious reasons, and more visible on the literary map than other local dialects). Furthermore, Singh and Maniruzzaman (1983: 80-81) advocate popular participation in language planning; for them, the state machine and language academies are merely auxiliary apparatuses for the coordination of efforts. This is a post-modern attitude, in our sense; modernization proceeds at the pleasure of the people. And the people in Bangladesh, as in the rest of FESHified Asia, feel comfortable with the duality of norms.

Following Singh and Maniruzzaman, we can propose a notion of ‘language community’, such as the Bangladeshi Bangla-speaking community, corresponding to common public perception and capable of retaining the rational kernel of Saussure’s legacy; and we can simultaneously build concepts articulating the post-modern community’s resistance against the hegemony of any one embodiment of the language as a whole. Such concepts underwrite the new plurality without destroying the classically recognized wholeness of the language community. The unity of that unit, and thus the existence of the language community level of organization of social reality, is in this fashion taken for granted. This move provides a definite and restricted role for Saussure’s convention theory to play. Some version of his theory of the arbitrary society-wide convention sustaining the unity of a language community can continue to function, then, at the level of the network categorized as that of the Bangla language. Within that unity, the specific theorizing corresponding to post-modern perception and practice will have to conceptualize the details of the Formal Elaboration of Social Hierarchy.

It is to the task of that conceptualization that we now turn.

## 2.4 Discourse Reception Theory

Our starting point is the generally accepted claim that in a diglossic system the H code, during its period of vitality, is culturally superior to (more cultivated than) the L code, and that during development (and specifically in the ‘educational’ process) there is some traffic in which H plays the donor role and L the receptor role.’ In elaboration of this claim, we propose (A) that the traffic is between discourses, and (B) that H and L are relative notions expressing such a dependency between discourses. For ease of reference, these two points may be called Tenets A and B of discourse reception theory.

Tenet A may be stated more carefully as follows: the donor-receptor relation, although it can be detected at several levels of incidence (as a relation between the cultural elite possessing superior knowledge and the cultural sub-elite acquiring it, between the H code normally used for the expression of the knowledge and the L code which through borrowing and other adaptations becomes capable of serving this purpose, etc.), is primarily located at the level of contact between a donor discourse and a receptor discourse. As an initial approximation, we may take a discourse to be a set of written and spoken texts and practitexts, where a practitext is a partly textual and partly practical product like a university course offered by a particular teacher over the years—reproduced from one year to the next, but with some modification.

Tenet B says that H and L are not statuses, uniquely assignable to this or that code (plus associated discourse) at a given time in a particular language community, but roles relative to a particular interdiscursive pairing. Thus, if Chalit Standard Bangla in Bangladesh plays H to the Dacca-Mymensingh Standard’s L, at the same time Chalit is still receiving from the archaic Saadhu Bangla Standard and counts as an L to Saadhu’s H, and it makes no sense to ask if Chalit is really H or L: it is L in the pairing where it is the receptor and H in the pairing where it is the donor. Equipped with these tenets, and with the idea that when people informally mention languages they often mean the discourses rather than the linguistic codes (the lexical and grammatical systems coupled with the pragmatic rules of using code items), we are now prepared to benefit from an insight of Pramatha Chaudhuri’s. In an article we have not cited in section 2.1, Sobuj pOttrer mukho-pOttro (Chaudhuri 1914a/1968: 25-30), which also first appeared in the first issue of Sobuj pOttro, Chaudhuri argues that Bengal will be able to reconcile what it learns from the West (in English) and what it learns from classical India (in Sanskrit) only if the operative standard in the Bangla network shifts from the Sanskrit-biased H to the more speechlike L:

The last point I would like to make is that, while modern education has brought a new life to this country and given birth to the impulse of creating a genuine literature, that same education has handicapped us in such a way that we have felt unable to act on that impulse. We have been caught between modern Europe and classical India to the point of nearly forgetting the Bangla we speak. We learn an English and write an H Bangla which are separated by a Sanskrit distance. We have quite properly sown the seeds of our English education in the appropriate terrain of classical India first; but we must now replant the resulting saplings in the soil of our own Bangla; otherwise the literature of our land will not blossom. The conceptual seeds brought to us by the life-giving winds of the West are unable to strike root in the true soil of our land, so they are either drying up or turning into parasites. [. . .] It is on an integration of the life-forces of classical India and Western modernity, not a sterile conflict between them, that the future of our literature and society depends. (1914a/1968: 29-30).

This argument makes no sense if we cleave to a linguistic code characterization of the crucial terms H Bangla, L Bangla, Sanskrit, English. Chaudhuri is obviously talking about the systems that can embody or carry learning, systems of discourse which embed textuality in practice. His argument has to be read in the context of a passage preceding it where he argues that the early modernization of Bengal in the nineteenth century involved, through English, a rediscovery of classical India’s Sanskrit discourse and a crucial marginalization of the more proximate late Sanskrit and early Bangla discourse of mediaeval/late mediaeval Bengal.* Chaudhuri was advocating a return from classical India to the true creativity now possible in Bengal, laden with the treasures of classical Indian culture rediscovered or reread in the light of modern European thought with which classical India had an affinity of life.

In his analysis, then, there had been a reception-pairing in which the Western discourse, coming through English, was H and the Sanskritized Saadhu Bangla discourse of the nineteenth century was an L situated in the present but oriented to a classical past in terms of which the Bengalis sought to assimilate Western learning. He proposed now to dismantle that pairing and to set up a new reception-pairing, this time with Chalit Bangla as L and a multiple H branching out into as many donor discourses as the self-confident nationalistic elite wanted to take on: ‘It is through the back-door of our Bangla house that we will have to try to bring in the elephant from classical India, it is in the earthen pitchers of the language of our Bengal that we will have to try to receive the seven seas’ (1914a/1968: 30). And in fact the record of Sobuj pOttro shows that the programme involved direct contact with European languages, unmediated through English, and with Sanskrit, unmediated through other languages, as far as possible, so that the contemporary Bengali mind could directly open ‘its own’ doors (rather than instrumentally used windows belonging to some other culture) to the influences of the wide world and those of India’s rich past reread in modern terms.

Chaudhuri’s analysis stresses that the modernization of an L code, in the sense of the standardization and register-linked differentiation of its formal devices in order to render it suitable for the modern world, involves ensuring that the discourse in which that L code is embodied initiates and sustains a receptive relationship with a one-language or plural donor discourse that is a ‘living’, productive locus of modernity.

This analysis contributes to the formal or theoretical part of our enterprise by emphasizing discourses rather than codes; Chaudhuri and his associates wrote not a single grammar or dictionary—they launched a periodical. The analysis contributes to the substantive or empirical part of our work by identifying the origin of the nexus between English and Sanskrit in modern India at what one might call the Orientalist moment (cf. Said 1978), and by clarifying the modern background in relation to which we can interpret the post-modern period’s massive deployment of English as an instrumental language. It is the background presence of the regional L discourses in India, discourses long nourished by a receptive coupling with a plural donor discourse including English, that enables the Indian population today to use English freely as an H code and yet not to let it under their skin.

Having constructed a discourse reception theory that enables us to incorporate these points in our analysis, our conceptualization of the present must now move on. Our statement of Tenet A of the theory offered only an initial, approximate conception of the key notion of Discourse. Let us work towards a more careful second approximation.

## 2.5 Discourses and Society Functions

In Dasgupta (1988), I have argued that the E-language which Chomsky (1986) mentions only as an epiphenomenal artifact (the mathematical set of all forms generated by the grammar or I-language, the Extension or External set corresponding to that Intension or Internalized function) does exist in the real world, though as an object of social scientific rather than grammatical description. I propose there that, in the mind of the individual speaker-hearer, the domain of core linguistics, that person's E-language is represented in two distinct but related ways: as a metagrammatical identificational attitude and as a discursive investment (in the psychological sense of cathexis). The attitude concerns both one’s fellow speaker-hearers (one expects them to have I-languages/grammars roughly identical to one’s own) and one’s own I-language, one’s internalized grammar with which one roughly identifies the grammars of others. The investment is in what that paper of mine calls a literature and this volume calls a discourse. One has a sense of partial stockholding, and of indefinitely extensible participation, in primarily the consumption and secondarily the production of a systematic discursive embodiment of the shared E-language towards whose grammar one has the identificational attitude.

That paper proposes further that Identification and Investment are both linked to a third entity, the Society Function, a mathematical function that would precisely characterize what the I-languages internalized by the members of the society have in common, and perhaps some aspects of where they differ from each other. I suggest there that the hermeneutic mystery, protecting the freedom of one person from total decipherment by another, makes the construction of a serious Society Function for a language formally impossible. But the mind naturally keeps trying to characterize the field of congregation where mutually attuned formal creativities meet. So it necessarily continues to wish to construct a reliable Society Function. Facing failure, the mind ends up fulfilling this unrealizable wish by accepting a fantasy substitute—a discourse to invest in.

This substitute fleshes out one’s Identification (the belief that one’s own I-language, mutatis mutandis, is also shared by the rest of the community) in the concrete form of a set of texts and practitexts. The discourse both instantiates the language one’s Identification attributes to one’s community and constructs an idealized picture of the composition of the community which the Identification indicates as the set of one’s fellow speaker-hearers. Dasgupta (1988) left open the now crucial issue of whether one language community must be satisfied with just one discourse or can afford to support at least two:

Many of us, indeed, would deny that there can be a pure linguistics that does not consider the question of acquisition in its theoretical core. And yet our interdisciplinary efforts over several decades have not even clarified the terms of our basic problem in this area. The basic problem is that the same child goes through different language developments at different levels of normativity. Sociolinguistics has long known, and has in fact built much of its subject matter around, the formal and functional differentiation between people’s careful productions in self-edited and formal settings and their care-free utterances in contexts of spontaneous informality. There is a sense in which every language is two languages (unless one prefers a bigger or vaguer number). Most discourse analysis picks up the big time language, and most conversational analysis looks at its more diversified and individualized small time counterparts. Thus, it is an obvious research question to what degree children develop a differentiated language as they get socialized into the complexity of the settings in which they have to live. Until one has at least framed the research question and linked other concrete questions to it, there is no organized field of language acquisition research, if one is to take the technical term ‘language’ seriously. The literature, however, indicates that working psycholinguists have found it more worthwhile to stick to the idealization of ‘grammatical development’, deferring the study of how multiple presence of language develops and managed to a future century. The proposal that ‘There is a sense in which every language is two languages’ can be made explicit in terms of the singleness of the virtually postulated but actually non-constructible Society Function (one language) and the descriptive duality of formal vs. informal incidence of this language (two codes). Britto (1986), in particular, has argued that this description holds of all languages, even in communities where self-conscious diglossia visible to the commonsensical eye has never been on the social agenda. However, to complete this explication, we need to ground the descriptive duality of the codes in some theoretical basis that makes sense of the contrast between the two discourses, as a principle of language rather than just a historical fact observed in the societies of FESHified Asia and other highly stratified areas.

Such a grounding will have to proceed cautiously, for we do not wish to come up with an account that implies that all societies are really more deeply stratified than they think they are, or that FESH itself is a socio-linguistic universal rather than an areal feature. (There is a risk of sounding like the doctor in Parashuram’s short story cikitSaSOngkoT ‘The medical crisis’ who asks the patient ‘Do you often vomit in the morning?’ and dismisses his negative answer, saying ‘Yes you do, you just don’t notice it’.)

What we have to be cautious about, in particular, is the temptation of suggesting that every society will necessarily exhibit a receptive pairing of two discourses, a donor H and a receptor L, within the language network and therefore oriented to the same Society Function (the same ‘language’), for reasons that have to do with intercultural facts such as conquest and colonization which are normally taken to have been the operative factors in the Asian

Our basic position is this. The society function is, by hypothesis, formally unavailable and yet functionally needed by the mind. Thus the mind seeks surrogate forms of linguistic unification of the community which would have been the bearer of the society function. Such unification can only be symbolic, not real, since the hermeneutic barrier prevents not only individual but even social actions from effecting an explicit synthesis of distinct exercises of freedom. This fact opens up the possibility of a plurality of discourses within the same language community offering several symbolic surrogates compensating for the real absence of a unifying society function.

These considerations provide a necessary condition, but not a sufficient condition, for the non-uniqueness of discourses; and they do not ground the binary approach of discourse reception theory but merely allow a plurality of discourses.

In section 2.6 we argue that further considerations motivate both non-uniqueness and binarity on grounds independent of the historical contingencies that have given rise to FESH in much of Asia, on grounds which are therefore admissible at the level of general socio-linguistic theory.

## 2.6 Discourses and Education

Our strategy is to pose the general problem of education in terms of levels of discourse, and to characterize the crucial notions in relation to the receptive pairing of learner and teacher.

We begin by assuming a pre-theoretical conception of education, deferring for the moment the task of sharpening it. Given the intuitive notion of a teaching system, suppose we ask for a general characterization of the cognitive goal of teaching. One answer might be that the teacher presents items which the learner initially finds difficult in terms of those which the learner finds easy; in teaching, the teacher pursues the goal of overcoming the points of difficulty, dissolving each difficult item into a configuration of easy items. This is a characterization which corresponds closely to the experience of the learner.

Suppose we then ask how the teacher does it. The first approximation makes it look as though what is difficult for the learner is intrinsically easy for the teacher. Plainly, this is not the case in general. Teachers have to prepare their lessons thoroughly and often get things wrong, especially when they are dealing with teenaged or older students. The teacher who ‘prepares a lesson’ draws on some resource which makes it possible to overcome certain difficulties, at least in the short run, and to show students how to overcome them. This resource is a system of knowledge. What is a system of knowledge?

Our proposal is that a system of knowledge is a discourse which uses a systematic network of semantic associations and explicitly derives complex formations from simple constituents and relations. A system of knowledge may or may not also contain a key that mediates between that discourse and the more popular discourse into which teaching must translate the knowledge. What characterizes periods of enlightenment is the growth of exoteric systems of knowledge that do provide such a key. The teacher’s job is to construct such a key if it is not otherwise available, and to put the students in touch with systematic knowledge.

Education is thus a relation between two discourses. The H discourse level of systematic knowledge codifies and organizes the textual and practical complexes in terms of the simple primes into which serious and systematic thought analyzes the complexes. The L discourse level of the learner—and, in his or her ordinary life, the teacher—conceptualizes items as being difficult, or remote from experience, versus easy, or accessible to common perception. Education is a mapping between the simple primes of the H world and the easy percepts of the L world.

To push the contrast further, something is easy to the extent that a learner has direct access to it in an experiential context, whereas something is simple to the extent that it is one of the stable results of the pursuit of a cognitive problem through a variety of texts (and practitexts), one of the elements of a stable solution to the problem enabling the pursuer to make coherent sense of the texts involved. Easiness has to do with direct access in contexts, while simplicity has to do with coherent understanding of texts.

These sharp polarities, of course, become invisible in the actual educational process. The learner is gradually initiated into a mixed discourse which begins by using unadulterated L and gradually introduces more and more chunks of H until it becomes a version of L that hugs H closely.

This analysis of the content of education implies a certain conception of the task of semantics and pragmatics. On the view outlined here, their core project has to be the construction of an explicit mapping between the organization of language on the principle of easiness or cognitive access (with notions such as sky and fire categorized as cognitive primes, ‘basic’ in various senses of the term and therefore maximally easy) and the organization of language along the lines of simplicity or rational derivability of concepts (with notions such as EXTREME and VERTICAL categorized as logical primes). Thus, the semantic sciences face the task of explicating what is learnt in education, from the point of view of

Notice that this general theory of education makes no crucial reference to dimensions along which societies vary. It is thus of general validity in principle. In practice, our exposition did allude to certain specific aspects of familiar educational processes in the highly organized societies of our day, where schooling detaches learners from the family setting. However, this feature of our exposition can be modified without damaging the argument. What has been said carries over to tribal societies where education is simply the set of processes leading to a child’s acquisition of full adult membership in the community. There as well, many adults play the teacher role and watch over the growth of a child, guiding it in such a way as to minimize the pain of overcoming difficulties, and making available to it the systematic knowledge accumulated in the tribe's long-term experience. The two-discourse analysis applies to education in non-formal systems as well.

The H discourse ultimately reflects the properties of the division of labour at any given stage of social organization. People develop to different degrees various special skills in coping with the environment and making possible the production of a human standard of living. The discursive embodiment of people's specializations is too vast to be efficiently retained in the memory of an individual; in every community, the full rationality involved in the community’s dealings with its environment is embodied only in its systematic accumulation of knowledge, stored and processed and handed down in specialized discursive forms. These H forms are always distinct, if only in their textual organization and pragmatics, from those associated with the everyday speech of individuals dealing with one another, the forms of the L discourse in which one records one’s personal memories and plans for the purposes of the individual or the family. Hence the universal duality of H and L discourses. Since the H discourse belongs to a much larger time-frame than L, it tends to be formally archaic, as studies of tribal languages have consistently noted.

Thus we have a derivation of discourse reception theory from what we might call fundamental socio-linguistic principles. We are proposing that the contrast between a formal H discourse and an informal L discourse is a necessary feature of the linguistic structure of a community—of the structure of E-language, if one prefers that term. Standard idealization strategies make it possible to minimize the visibility of this duality at various levels. To begin with, one may of course work with an instantaneous education idealization, thus eliminating the educational process itself from the picture, and reinforcing the instantaneous language acquisition idealization’s removal of children from the picture. These are simply convenient schematizations of the framework of study. More serious is an idealization that assumes that every member of a community, through instantaneous education, has acquired all the encyclopaedic knowledge of the community, thus eliminating the linguistic manifestation of the division of labour. Even on such an idealization, we would like to maintain, the difference between the textually oriented and systematic H discourse and the context-sensitive L discourse does not disappear. For instance, in societies where all educated people know that the earth travels around the sun, it is not an accident or a lapse that leads them to nevertheless speak in terms of the sun rising and setting for the purposes of normal life.

Given the intrinsic donor-receptor pairing of H and L within the educational process, we are able to extend discourse reception theory to cases where additional factors play a role, such as the dominance of one culture over another and unequal contact between their languages. However, our derivation of discourse reception theory from basic principles is clearly independent of such intercultural factors. We have progressed beyond section 2.5’s demonstration of the possibility of discourse non-uniqueness; we now see that discourses come in pairs (because of the polarity of public systematic knowledge and private contextual experience) and can guess that, to the extent that one big language can in principle encompass many little languages with separate communities of their own, there are going to be independent H-L pairings within each of those domains and also a large, umbrella-like H-L pairing for the whole expanse where the L is going to branch out into the various regional discourses which serve as H in their respective regions. Thus, issues pertaining to the full empirical complexity of diglossic systems can now be intelligibly formulated in the light of our conceptual derivation of the core principle of duality from general facts about language.

## 2.7 Wanted: A Characterization of FESH

We have the beginnings of a general theory in terms of which issues that have to do with FESH may be discussed but which does not falsely predict the universal occurrence of overt codification of the FESH type. It is now possible to approach FESHified Asia in general and India in particular. Our strategy will be to restrict the discussion to India without prejudging the question of how much of this carries over to the rest of FESHified Asia, hoping that some of it does.

The classical Indian synthesis that took shape during the Gupta empire, and found its voice in Kaalidaasa, offers, far more clearly than present-day India, the spectacle of a society of formally demarcated codes correlated with an elaborate social hierarchy. Even if we allow for stylization, the fact is that Kaalidaasa’s work presents a discursively differentiated cast of actors with some speaking Sanskrit, some this Prakrit, and some that Prakrit, depending on whether they are men or women, twice-born or once-born, sentries or fishermen, and so forth. Given that the Gupta period’s audience could accept this as a reasonable representation of the socio-linguistic diversity of India, we cannot attribute the whole thing to poetic stylization. Furthermore, stable retention of socially differentiated multilingualism has remained a feature of Indian society to this day, as Indian socio-linguists from Pandit onwards have noted. These matters have often been discussed in the literature.

The point where we come in has nothing to do with the existence of codified diversity as such. Our main point is that the codes involved in this differentiation are identified by revealing names such as Sanskrit/saMskrta ‘Cultivated’, Prakrit/praakrta ‘Natural’, Apabhramsa/apabhraMSa ‘Vulgar’. This contrasts with the Roman empire, where the language of cultivation was Greek and the medium of administration Latin, or with the Russia portrayed by Tolstoy, where the aristocracy spoke French among themselves and Russian with the plebeians. The language names Latin, Greek, French, Russian identify geographically distinct communities and not frozen levels of cultivation or social prestige. Socio-linguistic thinking has so far failed to note, or to try to interpret, the significant fact that on the classical Indian map the language names designated hierarchical levels of socio-linguistic elaboration and not geo-ethnic identities.

It is not only the young discipline of socio-linguistics that has neglected these matters. Even comparative philology or historical linguistics, which supposedly spent two centuries comparing Sanskrit with its European counterparts, had to wait until Coulson (1976: xii) for the crucial observation that, when one compares the overarching role of Sanskrit in classical India with that of Latin in mediaeval Europe, one finds that ‘There is, however, an important difference. Few would deny Cicero or Vergil a greater importance in Latin literature than any mediaeval author. Conversely, few Sanskritists would deny that the centre of gravity of Sanskrit literature lies somewhere in the first millennium A.D., for all that its authors were writing in a so-called dead language.’ It is important to correlate this fact about Sanskrit with the unusual language names of classical India.

The key, obviously, lies in the question of whether Sanskrit in the classical period was indeed a ‘dead language’, a question which Coulson discusses. He would prefer the term ‘learned’ to ‘dead’: ‘The literary medium of any language contains elements of learned speech’, he says, and Sanskrit develops this potential to an unusual degree. It is clear that this discussion of the livingness or deadness of the cultivated language Sanskrit ties in with Pramatha Chaudhuri’s concern about the deadness of Saadhu Bangla and the livingness of Chalit. That Sanskrit was alive in classical India, a fact indicated by Kaalidaasa’s achievement and plenty of independent evidence, must have been due to the absence or relative absence of sustainable vitality in the other languages on the map. We need to understand what factors in the setting made possible the fact that society’s linguistic vitality peaked in its extremely learned and non-natural language bearing the name Sanskrit, a name which went so far as to celebrate this artificiality.

If such understanding is conditional on first producing a principled characterization of FESH in keeping with the principles of the discourse theory we have been working on, then we want a characterization of FESH first; we will try the model on classical India and see if it fits.

One condition on any adequate theory of FESH is that it must at least make sense of the facts of present-day India. One important trait of our society, which exhibits FESH (a variety of it that features the most blatant caste system in the world) and places English at the top of the socio-linguistic tree, is that English does not hold in our India the creative position that Sanskrit held in the Gupta empire. This serious disanalogy between English in post-modern India and Sanskrit in classical India is a fact that any theory of FESH must deal with.

Accordingly, we will postpone the FESH job proper and take a closer look at Indian English first. Moving away from the broad problem of formulating a general theory of FESH, chapter 3 will first address some specific empirical problems pertaining to the position of English in post-modern India; and then, via the idea that the creative centre of gravity of the Indian linguistic scene lies in the Indian languages and that this explains the incomplete integration of English today (compared with Sanskrit in the Gupta period), we will bring the discussion back to the broader level of India as a FESHified area.

## Notes

1. Rigorously transcribed, the words are colit and Sadhu in Bangla (calita and saadhu in Sanskrit).

2. Some readers will wish to read this discussion of ‘educational’ polarities in conjunction with our thematization, elsewhere in the book (especially in chapter 5), of teaching-oriented and learning-oriented approaches to modernization.

3. ‘It is our new education that has taught us to identify, in the vast antiquity of classical India, an appropriate domain for the critical cultivation of the modern ideas we are acquiring. English education has stimulated us to return to the vital spark of the forgotten past of our country. This is why our mind jumps over Bengal and Bihar, and the intervening fifteen centuries or so, and reaches classical Aaryaavarta. Consequently our classical poet is now Kaalidaasa, not Kaashii Daas; our philosopher Shamkara, not Gadaadhara; our religious codifier Manu. not Raghunandana: our poetician Dandin, not Vishwanaatha. We now treat the mediaeval neo-logical codifications of nyaaya, darSana, and smrti as anything but new. Instead what was chronologically old has come back to us with new life. This is because, between the modern literature of Europe and the ancient literature of India, there is an inner correspondence, if not a formal analogy. For they are both alive . . . . It is the spark of this new life of ours that animates the best writing today. Writings that do not carry this spark are still-
