# Foreword

*Udaya Narayana Singh*

## 1. Goals

This series presents an alternative view on problems of language and educational development and planning from an essentially Asian perspective where Third World problems in social engineering are highlighted. Although the series will under-score the problems faced by the nations that are currently undergoing development, or those that are late entrants in the game of development, it is expected that the valuable conclusions it draws will have far-reaching consequences, both theoretical and practical, for students of the sociology of language. It has been a growing realization in the developing world that any viable theory of developmental planning must be based on the assumption that problems facing the developing nations are of a different order than those faced by the developed polities, and that it is necessary to

1. visualize a different typology of cultural, linguistic and educational problems,

2. redefine the concept of language problems.

3. sharpen our understanding of what can be possible goals and strategies of planning to be applied to nations which are linguistically heterogeneous and culturally pluralistic, and

4. outline a planning paradigm that can accommodate both monistic and pluralistic goals of development.

## 2. Problems

At the outset, one must admit that it is extremely difficult, if not virtually impossible, to present a full account of the problems of development of languages in the Third World in the space of a single volume, because of our inherent diversity and because of the problems most of us have inherited from the colonial legacy. We realize that it will require a much bigger canvass to present a true picture of the debates in this field that have already taken place in the recent decades (and hence still matter to us) and the ones that must begin now. It is for these reasons that a series on language and development has been conceived.

The diversity that we often talk about is impossible to imagine unless one lives a life, day in and day out, split between languages and cultures as one does in most countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America. If we take up the case of India, we find the following confusing descriptions: The Census of India, 1971, informs us that there are at least 221 languages spoken by 10,000 speakers or more in India, out of which 33 have above 1,000,000 speakers and 49 above 100,000. Probably because of a shift in language identity, as also of a changed governmental policy in interpreting demographic data, the 1981 Census shows the total number of languages as 103, including besides 15 languages in the eighth schedule, 20 others with 1,000,000 and 90 with over 10,000 speakers. If one goes into the earlier official figures for the number of mother-tongues (1,652 according to the Census of 1961), the result is bewildering. It is true that the speech varieties recognized as major languages in the eighth schedule of the Indian constitution (i.e., 15 major languages belonging to four different language families each of which has substantial number of speakers and reasonably long literary tradition) make up for a little over 97 percent of our population. To this list, one has to add three more recently recognized major languages—Konkani, Manipuri and Nepali. However, the Census figures also say that at least 25.4 million Indians do not speak any one of these as mother-tongues. There are many countries in the world that have close to such a figure of total population, and it is not difficult to understand that such countries and their experiences and perspectives in language development cannot be the same as that of countries of India's complexity.

The number of languages spoken in India thus varies between 105 and 486. Let us consider some more figures: Newspapers are brought out in 35 languages; the highest literary body and the national academy of letters, called the Sahitya Akademi, recognizes 22 Indian languages; 67 languages are used in education at some level or the other; and, 104 are used by the radio network. Such descriptions will naturally raise a sense of horror in the minds of prospective students of language and education planning, and they can go on endlessly.

Basing his analysis of policies of self-reliance and education in developing countries on a UNESCO survey of 100 countries in 1975, Peter Mandi of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences says that 'the structures required to satisfy the cadre and trained work-force requirements of self-reliance have been created in an astonishingly short time. The developing countries are currently capable of organizing a gradually expanding domestic production, and a workable administration and services sector, including education itself by relying on their own internal resources' (Mandi 1980: 219). At the three levels of education—primary, secondary and tertiary, comparative figures of 1950 and 1975 (Hardiman and Midgley 1982) show an increase at the rate of 365 percent, 920 percent and 1,056 percent, respectively, which seem very impressive. The proportion of adults who are literates has also gone up from about 40 percent in 1960 in the Third World countries to nearly 60 percent.

These figures, however, do not make it obvious that literacy rates in the developing countries with low income have increased from 28 percent to 50 percent, and in developing countries in the middle income group from 56 percent to 65 percent. The contrast is not very significant considering the fact that the latter spend 14.3 percent of their public money on education as against the former's

5.9 percent, and that in absolute terms much more money is spent by the middle income developing countries because they have much higher public funds than the poorer countries in the Third World. We have no explanation for this discrepancy in investment in education and results.

As pointed out by Morawetz (1977), the figures on educational development also hide the fact that while Latin American countries showed an increase from 65 percent in 1960 to 95 percent in 1975, performance of the African nations was quite dismal: from 20 percent to only 26 percent during the same period—whether it is secondary level or other levels of education. In fact, differences within the developing countries is so vast that a unitary universalistic policy planning seems a distant possibility.

## 3. Achievements and Hidden Realities

Achievements of Third World countries at the level of primary education have been more significant than that at the secondary or other levels. Although, because of population explosion, the bottom and middle group nations show a downhill trend in the secondary education between 1965 and 1974, the fact that by 1974 at least about 50 percent population of the appropriate age group has joined the elementary education system is no mean achievement. Also significant is the fact that more countries (57 in all) have recorded enrolment of over 80 percent at this level, although an equal number of them figure at the bottom level in the field of secondary education. Here only 26 of the original 57 countries could remain on the top. The situation is of course, dismal at the level of higher education.

It will be interesting to find out where India stands in this respect. India is a part of the top group in primary education and since 1978-79 has been in the middle group in respect of the two other levels of education. The figures for this period (1978-79) show 81.6 percent, 38.0 percent, and 4.9 percent, respectively at the primary, secondary and tertiary levels. Here, 38.0 percent is of course misleading because if 11-17 and 18-34 age-groups are taken together, the overall performance comes down to 28.4 percent at the secondary level. Considering the fact that in 1978-79, we had 128 universities and 8,698 colleges with 132,382 highly trained teachers at these levels, 3.82 million students look ideal as far as the teacher-student ratio is concerned, but it is surely not ideal enough considering our developmental needs. Interestingly, no figure is available for the tertiary level after this period until

1985-86, so that there is no way of commenting on the progress made here. But the figures for the primary and secondary levels in 1985-86 look impressive in comparison to world figures. Still, only

3.71 percent of the public money is spent on education, i.e., for every rupee spent on education, all the governments taken together

(central, state and union territories) spent Rs. 36 on other sectors.

Thus, in 1981 India spent about 3.0 percent of its GNP on education which is as much as Sri Lanka did, other South Asian neighbours fell way behind these two countries, although there was a big gap in the exact amount spent by them (India could naturally afford to spend 18 times more than her southern neighbour).

There are, however, many realities that remain hidden under these figures. First, not all administrative units in India are developing equally well even in respect of primary education which has shown considerable progress over the years. The number of children of age 6-11 going to school differs enormously from one place to another. The gap in the teacher-student ratio also remains equally wide. If our educational system plans to cover children from all linguistic communities and geographic regions as well as from all socio-economic strata, what we need is about 2,497,195 more school-teachers at different levels. As it is, the teacher-student ratio at the primary level is very unfavourable: 1:57. The middle schools present another kind of problem, that of growing drop-out rates, something which is evident from the ratio here: 1:29, the high school level ratio being 1:15. This shows that for every set of 29 students in a middle school, about the same number, i.e., 28 is taken out of school by their parents. Besides, only half of those that remain actually go to the secondary level. The situation is surely alarming.

In the field of literacy too, we are told that 'though the highest rates of illiteracy are to be found in African countries, the largest number of illiterates reside in the Indian subcontinent. In terms of the number of illiterates aged 15 or over, South Asia accounted for 38.6 per cent of the world total in 1970, and according to the Office of Statistics of UNESCO 1978, it will account for 43.5 per cent by 1990' (Srivastava 1983: 2). In 1990, according to a 1986 estimate, India would house 286.3 million of the 450.8 million illiterates in South Asia and 884.0 million of the world total. There is another important dimension in literacy statistics that is quite often over-looked. As Literacy Statistics at a Glance (1979) tells us: in 1971 the male vs. female literacy ratio in India was 39:18, the urban vs. rural divide showed a gap of 52:23, and that the religious and linguistic minorities had only 13 percent literacy as against an all-India figure of 29.35 percent. These disparities are no less alarming.

## 4. The Reasons

What we can gauge from this picture is that even in traditional areas of development, India as well as a number of other Third World countries do not show any uniform pattern. It is necessary for us to identify some reasons behind the unevenness in social, educational and linguistic development.

The first reason seems to be that language and linguistic identity have become a matter of manipulation by many, and the changes of situation and shifts in identity are so quick that these have given rise to what Khubchandani (1983: 7) calls the Fluid Zone and the Stable Zone. It is in the fluid zone that 'one notices many vacillating trends in the census declarations of mother tongues in the entire zone, representing fluidity of the language psychological contexts and fluctuating according to the socio-political climate and the pressures of acculturation'. In fact, this concept of fluidity should be expanded for it to be visualized as a continuous process of moltening effect (cf. Singh 1992) which in physical sciences is used as a process through which a metal can be first melted and then turned into a hot sticky solid in varying degrees and forms because of application of excessive heating mechanisms. It seems to me that a number of socio-political forces are acting as destabilizing agents in certain 'fluid' zones so that the process of moltening applies to form entities and groups of different kinds after every movement, turmoil, upheaval, tension, riot, and war.

It is not as if moltening does not operate in what Khubchandani (1983) calls a relatively stable zone (outside the Hindi-Urdu-Punjabi area) because it is in the nature of these forces to intensify, spread, and shift in respect of issues so as to have new guises every time they appear as agent provocateurs. Because of the over-politicization of certain areas through a moltening effect, the average members of these speech communities find it hard to determine (a) whether the welfare programme(s) launched by the government is going to do any good to them (because each such programme will usually have many kinds of conflicting evaluations); (b) whether they should at all send their children to a particular medium of education or a particular educational system (there are usually schools with varied patterns in such fluid zones, hoping to attract different groups or as wide clientele as possible); (c) whether, having sent their children to study, they should not withdraw them to share work in their profession; or (d) whether, having sent their children to one pattern of schooling which may emphasize one set of linguistic and cultural values, they must not send them to what they later perceive or what they are now told are better school systems. Notice that moltening is different from 'immanence' effect (cf. Calhoun 1976: 328) which is the process of change implicit in the organization of any social institution at any moment. This immanence and the rate of change may be accelerating or decelerating at any given period, which can be claimed theoretically not to exist in a highly stable social order, but which in practice is present everywhere. Moltening is more than these immanent changes because it leads to a disequilibrium and fluidity among the members by creating a situation of crisis. No doubt, the nations in the developing world are full of such crises.

Interestingly, each one of these moltening agents, whether they are political elites, literary figures, cultural heroes or religious missionaries, work with a belief that the alternative to any existing Practice they are suggesting is sure to take the community towards a more desirable goal. And for each such person or group, there is Practices and beliefs. But the large body of masses, the common people who are at the receiving end, get thoroughly confused as to which of these various goals is ideal, and which of these groups to identify with.

It is not, however, always the case that the agents of social change fail. More often than not, they are successful, as is the case of our northern neighbour, Nepal. Wood (1976) describes how the porters, Gorkha soldiers, visiting businessmen and relatives, foreign visitors and religious institutions acting as agents of change in Nepal have been successful in this respect.

The other reason for India's uneven progress on the education and literacy fronts seems to be the wrong priorities fixed by the planners while developing our educational curricula. First, as can be shown on the basis of 1974 statistics (Chaturvedi and Mohale 1976), there is wide discrepancy in the contact hours for language teaching in different states, varying from 35 periods per week in Kerala and Tamil Nadu to 54 periods per week in Jammu and Kashmir. But the majority falls between 39 (6 states) and 48 (8 states and union territories). Again, the number of hours devoted to the teaching of languages (as compulsory and optional subjects) also varies from 11 to 33; in terms of percentages, from 26.2 to 61.1. These figures make sense when we find that the states that devote less than 35 percent of teaching hours to language education are those (Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Mizoram, Nagaland and Meghalaya) that have either single dominant language or English as the main language in the education pattern. In the states and UTs that devote more than 45 percent time to language teaching (i.e., Kerala, Chandigarh, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Tripura, Manipur, Assam, West Bengal and Jammu and Kashmir) the situation can be described by any one of the following: (a) It is possible that some administrative units show extreme heterogeneity where one finds more emphasis on language education, as is particularly true for Assam, Tripura and West Bengal; (b) a particular state or UT is perceived as a largely monolingual entity (although it may not be actually so), and hence there are various pulls and pressures and an overdose of teaching of the 'standard' language—Hindi or Urdu as in Jammu and Kashmir and Uttar Pradesh; (c) a particular state may not be as varied linguistically but the people of the state find it important to strengthen their roots by emphasizing on either a Western language (English in Kerala) or an ancient language (such as Sanskrit in Manipur). It is more difficult to characterize those that do not fall in any of these groups—the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh, devote 37.5 percent time to language education, while Delhi, Orissa and Bihar have a figure of 41.0 percent, and Arunachal and Himachal fall between these two sub-sets, with only Punjab, Goa, Daman and Diu, and two UTs (Lakshadweep and Dadra) showing quite higher allotment of time.

These observations do not seem to fall in any neat pattern, except that they include a number of clearly fluid zone areas (Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Delhi and Bihar), while a few others in the same zone (Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and Chandigarh), show even higher rates of allotment of time for language teaching. Pandit (1973, 1977) raised an extremely important question about this trend of allotment of disproportionate classroom time for language education. His claim, which I think is partly true, was that more than the teachers of language and literature, it was the subject teachers who exposed students to the languages that were used as media of instruction. If that was so, why spend so many school hours on teaching languages in the life span of 1,679 million school students enrolled at different levels of education?

## 5. Linguistic Heterogeneity and Policy Formation

One possible answer to this why is our linguistic heterogeneity. The critics of a pluralistic position would surely be happy to use it as an argument against multilingual education. But I suppose more than the diversity factor it is the planning of language education done by the government and its various agencies that is to be blamed.

It is a historical fact that whatever be the defects in Lord Curzon's education planning, it was he who moved swiftly, as soon as he came to India in 1899, and introduced changes that were overdue. It was during his tenure that the Government of India passed the following resolution on Indian Educational Policy in 1904 with regard to teaching of Indian languages:

The mother-tongue of the pupil should be used as the medium of instruction both at the primary and middle stages. The Government did not accept the opinion that English should take the place of the mother-tongue. But some mastery over English at the middle stage was necessary, so that the pupil could make better progress in High School stage where English was the medium of instruction.

The resolution on Educational Policy (1904) further added: English has no place, and should have no place in scheme of primary education. It has never been part of the policy of the Government to substitute English language for the vernacular dialects of the country. As a general rule, a child should not be allowed to learn English as a language until he has made some progress in the primary stages of instruction and has received a thorough grounding in his mother-tongue. The line of division between the use of vernacular and of English as medium of instruction should broadly speaking be drawn at a minimum age of 13. No scholar in a secondary school should, even then, be allowed to abandon the study of his Vernacular, which should be kept up until the end of the school course (as quoted in Curzon 1949). Curzon had many more innovative ideas but some such as his directive that the curricula of rural primary schools should be different from those of the urban schools did not materialize. Nor did his desire that agriculture be included as a subject right from the primary level in the schools located in the rural areas.

Parts of the resolution quoted earlier show nothing but the transfer model that is being advocated today as a formula for retaining both mother-tongue and the language of advantage: English. It is also noteworthy that the document does not restrict itself to major Indian 'languages' being included as 'mother-tongues' in the school curricula. It uses the words 'vernacular' and 'vernacular dialects' on purpose because Lord Curzon not only stated the need for a different syllabus for rural schools, he also maintained that instruction in a rural primary school ought to be integrally related to the local environment.

The resolutions passed at the Calcutta convention of the Indian National Congress in 1906 started what is now known as the 'National Education Movement'. The resolutions clearly mentioned that education through the mother-tongue was an important feature of the scheme proposed by the Congress in order to make the students aware of their literary traditions and cultural heritage. As a consequence of this growing trend, the National Council of Education, established in 1906, set up a Bengal National College of which Sri Aurobindo was the first principal. The Council also gave a clear directive that education would be imparted ordinarily through the medium of the vernacular with English as a compulsory subject. Though the National Education Movement (1905-38) succeeded on many counts, it also failed on many fronts because at different stages it was sectarian (in the first phase, in 1905-10 when the Muslims did not join it and instead created a separate forum, the Muslim League); localized (mainly in Bengal); conjoined with other issues (such as partition of Bengal); violent (linked with the swadeshi/Boycott movement in general); to a great extent un-innovative (changes in the content not being practical); and elitist (restricted among the bhadralok or the elite upper middle class).

During the second (1911-22) and third phases (1930-38) of the National Education Movement many of these defects were removed as clear reasoning and rationality surfaced. As a result these phases witnessed major contributions in institution-building, a rise in national consciousness (as a consequence of which Indian languages witnessed tremendous literary creativity, and Indological studies too received the desired impetus) and formal attempts to make primary education free, universal and compulsory as well as certain novel schemes such as Gandhiji's 'Basic Education'. Before the third phase began, the national Civil Disobedience Movement, and after it World War II acted as impediments to this movement but all through the emphasis was on the mother-tongue as the medium of instruction.

As additional evidence, one can quote Sharp (1920), who, on the basis of educational records of the period between 1781 and 1839, tells us that in 1823 the district of Bellary had 6 different languages serving as media of instruction: Kannada in 235 schools; Telugu in 226; Marathi in 23; Persian in 21; Tamil in 4; and English in 1. It may, however, be mentioned that even during this period, traces of segmental and hierarchical educational systems of the pre-colonial days remained. Just as there were 'advanced' (both gurukul and madrasseh) and 'ordinary' (again, known as pathsala and maktab) traditions of education in India earlier, even in 1823 in Bellary there were 23 schools exclusively for brahmins. Those who knew the sista-bhasa (language of the elite, i.e., the standard language) such as Sanskrit and Arabic/Persian acted as liaison between the rulers and masses (Khubchandani 1981: 2).

## 6. After Independence

It was only after independence that one found an official suggestion in favour of vernaculars, viz., that Indians must learn a regional language, a general language (Hindi), and English (cf. Government of India 1949). After independence, there was indeed a change in terms of the constitutional provisions on language policy. The Indian Constitution (Article 343) made it very clear that the official language of the Union shall be Hindi in Devanagari script with a provision that the numerals will be adopted from the Roman (international) character. The constitutional provision in articles 120, 343 and 344 tell us that for all official purposes and particularly in the parliament, the language to be used will be Hindi with the proviso that for a period of 15 years from the adoption of the Constitution English may be used. It was expected that after this period Hindi would replace English. (However, this was not translated into reality as English has continued as the associate official language of the Indian Union.) Articles 210, 345, 346 and 347 give us policy statements on the use of regional languages in state legislatures and in various other domains. For instance, article 347 states that if the President 'is satisfied that a substantial proportion of the population of a state desires the use of any language spoken by them to be recognized by that state', he may 'direct that such language shall also be officially recognised throughout that state or any part thereof for such purpose as he may specify' (Basu 1977). These articles also give us general directions on the use of language between one state and another, or between a state and the Union government. Articles 348 and 349 are concerned with the policy of language in the Supreme Court and in the High Courts for acts, bills and for other legal proceedings. Finally, articles 350, 350A, 350B and 351 respectively provide Indian citizens the right to use any language for official purposes: make demands upon the state governments or local administration to provide facilities for instruction in one's mother-tongue at the primary stage; or for appointment of a Special Officer to protect the language rights of the linguistic minorities; and guidelines on development and promotion of the Hindi language.

Later, in 1953, the scope of language education was broadened so that the Commission for Secondary Education recommended teaching of five languages: mother-tongue, regional language, two 'federal' languages (Hindi and English) and an optional language (one of the classical languages). Notice that this was the time UNESCO (1953) recognized the principle of mother-tongue education on psychological, sociological and linguistic grounds. The Council for Secondary Education (1956) came up with a three-language formula divided into two parts: (a) mother-tongue, Hindi and English for the non-Hindi zone, and (b) Hindi, any other Indian language, and English for the Hindi belt.

The same pattern had the endorsement of the Central Advisory Board of Education in 1957. The problem of link language for communication gave rise to this three-language formula authored primarily by Nehru who as the first prime minister of India was responsible for many such policy decisions. With some modifications, it was accepted at the Conference of Chief Ministers of various states in 1961. We all know that this particular policy decision gave birth to a prolonged controversy. In terms of implementation of the formula, there were obvious pedagogic and curricular problems. But more serious objections came from the linguistic minorities whose mother-tongues were different from the regional language. For such children, it became a four language formula; they had to read their mother-tongue, a regional language, Hindi and English. In addition, in the Hindi-speaking belt, one found lack of motivation for language learning when the language to be learnt was of Dravidian origin. On the other hand, in Tamil Nadu, the policy was seen as a plot to impose Hindi on them.

The 1966 Education Commission 'liberalized' the formula so that by the end of middle school (i.e., the lower secondary stage), a student will have acquired sufficient control over three languages: mother-tongue and two non-native modern languages—Hindi as the official and link language and English as an associate official language and as a language for higher education and international communication. It was for the individual states and union territories to decide whether to give Hindi the second or third place. According to this revised formula, the length of contact years for each of these languages was thought to be different: 10 years for mother-tongue/regional language; 6 years for the official language (Hindi/ English) from class V onwards and 3 years for a modern language not covered under the other two. As was expected, the formula was interpreted differently by different states. Some states replaced the 'modern language' label of the third option with a 'classical language' such as Sanskrit. Subsequently a number of census returns claimed Sanskrit to be mother-tongue of some informants. Strangely enough, this was thought to be a 'sufficient' argument to prove Sanskrit to be a modern language. West Bengal and Orissa also showed a favourable trend towards opting for Sanskrit as a third language, rather than selecting Hindi. Some (Tamil Nadu and Mizoram) did not at all have the third language, and thus avoided the teaching of Hindi. In a kind of 'retaliatory' move, some Hindi-speaking states made getting a pass grade in English in school-leaving examinations optional.

## 7. The Problems of Minority Linguistic Groups

It may be noted that all through there has been a confusion over which language to be taught as the first language. The concept of the first language was invented by the educational administrators, and it did not have any foundation in linguistics. Some states insisted that only the regional languages should be taught even when the mother-tongue of a student was different. This surely was a source of tension between the displaced minorities (those who have dominance in a contiguous or a neighbouring state such as Marathis in Karnataka) and the majority language pressure groups. The indigenous minority groups in Indian states are either scattered over several states or are so few (in terms of relative size of their population) that they are not at all taken seriously unless major violence erupts (as in the case of Bodo, Santali, Nepali or Jharkhand movements). For many of these minorities, even when their mother-tongue was introduced into the educational system, it became 'virtually a four-language formula' (Khubchandani 1983: 138). Consequentially, indigenous minorities feared that they would be discriminated against if they either did not study through the medium of the regional language/ Hindi/English or at least did not take the language of the region as an additional subject in the school. If we add to that what Khubchandani (1983: 107) called the 'shuttlecock' phase of mother-tongue claims where the oscillation in the census returns for mother-tongue would beat all possible imagination, the effect of what I called the moltening process would become clearer. The indigenous minorities (such as the speakers of Bhojpuri, Magahi, Maithili, Sadani in Bihar; Rajasthani, Marwari, Dhundhari, Mewari in Rajasthan; Kumauni, Garhwali, Jaunsari in U.P; Pahari, Man-deali, Kulvi in Himachal Pradesh; Dogri, and Gojri in the Jammu and Kashmir; or Nimadi and Bhili in the Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat) as well as the religious minorities (in particular, the Urdu speech community) are the two groups that are involved in this oscillation because of various ill-conceived moves by different agencies and commissions as also because of their other-than-language demands to which sufficient attention was never paid.

This destabilizing process also gave rise to what I have earlier (Singh 1987b) called the 'sunflower syndrome'—a bitter internal strife among the minorities, where they hate each other, fight for the second best slot, and look up to the Sun, the superposed language of power in this case, for building models, i.e., standard language and literature. This is true of the three eastern New Indo-Aryan (NIA) languages in Bihar (Bhojpuri, Magahi and Maithili), for example.

There are various other issues arising out of the Education Commission's (1966) suggestions 'like the sequencing of learning of different languages, compatibility between different language courses, and structure and development of language curriculum' (Dua 1985: 192) that one need not discuss here because there will be others in this series who will probably deal with them in detail.

## 8. The Zero Option in the Model of Development

The picture being as bewildering as I have pointed out, it would give rise to various reactions among language planners or among those who have concern for language development. According to one school of thought since languages have an immanent mechanism to change, and since any move towards development in areas other-than-language will percolate down to language development anyway, there need not be any organized and conscious intervention in the matter of language. This view would suggest that time would decide which of the small speech communities would be able to maintain their languages and which ones would shift towards a different identity, and that any anthropological concern shown by the government would lead to wasteful expenditure and false moves, and would produce no viable results in the ultimate analysis. This can be called the zero option in the theory of language and education planning. More often than not, the promoters of this approach believe in linguistic homogeneity in disguise because their hope is that through a natural process of evolution and survival/attrition, the picture of heterogeneity will be simplified and the figures will look less confusing.

## 9. The Monistic Option

There is a second school of thought which is committed to taking steps so that the country moves closer to being homogeneous. The theoretical foundation of this school I have already criticized at length elsewhere (Singh 1992) and labelled it the monistic option (Singh 1987a). This approach arose out of confidence that a theory or strategy that was found valid for a developed entity would also be valid for a developing entity. It also believed that trends true for other-than-language planning will have parallels for language planning as well. This approach had its root in several factors: It could possibly be due to a lack of understanding of socio-linguistic processes and pluricultural undercurrents of the Third World nations by researchers of developed societies. While lamenting the lack of concern for research in a comparative social policy involving the Third World, MacPherson and Midgley (1987: 5) stated in clear terms that 'the neglect of the Third World is a reflection of the parochialism of many social policy researchers in industrial countries such as Britain and the United States who have often regarded their own societies as macrocosm for social policy analysis'.

Clearly, one thesis that came up because of the monistic tendencies and received wide support was that the languages of the developing world could develop only through translation—translation of texts, words, ideas, technologies and ways of life. Even though translation as both tool and goal was desirable (and is not a new realization in this part of the world where a large number of original language texts, inscriptions, legends and myths ultimately survived the onslaught of time only because of interlingual renderings that had a long tradition in Asian nations), there is no doubt that because of its vertical and unidirectional character, a translating speech community has to pay a very heavy price in terms of setting up of cultural hierarchies. The translating language-community has an evaluation tag attached to it that puts it permanently in a disadvantageous position. Even today, the politics of knowledge is such that hierarchically superior culture(s) would drain out the best brains that speak the translating language and would allure and acculturate them to write exclusively in the language of power. This puts the translating language at an irretrievably low place in the hierarchy which leads to an unequal dominance configuration and ultimately to cultural annihilation. It must, therefore, be realized by the educated elite of the translating language that they owe a debt to their mother-tongues, which can be best repaid by creating knowledge in their mother-tongue. This knowledge must be such that the superior language community should be forced to translate it into the language(s) of 'dominance'. Fortunately, this awareness is not merely a pious wish. It is a realization that many of us in the developing world have. And the more we have this realization, the better are our chances of blocking a cultural hegemony that always lurks behind all decisions to develop through translation.

The polemic used here only underscores that translation is a tool which has to be used with discretion, a bridge that mediates between two cultures and communities, and a move that aims at greater democratization of knowledge. There is no doubt that translation has now become a supplementary way of growing. Theory-building in all sciences and technology will crucially depend on translation, rather than only on inner probe. For taking positions on a number of theoretical issues, we now look up to the translator who can tell us how such questions have been asked or formulated and/or answered in other cultures. So a translator acts also as a real or potential repository of knowledge. This suggests that from a vertical and unidirectional activity translation has now become, to a large extent, horizontal and multidirectional.

## 10. The Pluristic Option and the Western Models

The second point that immediately strikes one is that even when an average Western researcher approaches a particular problem in language and education planning of a developing nation, the approach has a bias similar to the religious bias the Christian missionary educators once had in eastern Nigeria. Such a researcher thus approaches a problem or a target zone with a bias that makes him perceive that 'tendencies towards centralization and agglomeration are strong in developing countries, and this . . . leads to a certain amount of elimination of linguistic heterogeneity' (Deutsch 1953). It is not my purpose to give this impression that everybody emerging out of a Western background of scholarship will have such a bias. But many of them have approached language pro-on ideas of language either as a unifying or divisive force (cf. Kelman 1971), and this has got stuck with our ruling elite that emerged in the post-independence period. The advocates of what can be called a pluristic option did not believe that one was good and many was bad. When Pattanayak (1981, 1986) argued in a perception of the two traditions of scholarship: while a Western scholar faced with massive linguistic heterogeneity and pluriculturalism would start with a 'why' question, the Eastern scholar (or call him the noble man from the 'South' following the Brandt Report 1980) being accustomed to living within a pluralistic situation would start with an explanation as to 'how' the communication pattern was organized in such a nation.

Consider first the modern moment, when the Western world thought that the principal source of knowledge was teaching the world the lesson of techno-industrial nationalism. Life in the post-modern era laid a territorial emphasis, voiced by regional and sectoral interests, obscured the older nationalism whose achievements were taken for granted and were thought to be necessary to forget. The nationalist issues thus gave way to the post-nationalist agenda of a plural dialogue that changed the face of the old normativity in terms of sub-spaces and questions that had for long been considered sacred.

The old images are thus relegated to the background, and one's attention moves to new images articulating regional interests. Consequently, this rewriting of history amounts to a spatial dispersion of what was perceived as a single track progression route. While retaining an overall continuity with the content of nationalism, we need to revise our tentative idea that it must be an American-style activist model of history-making that is sought to copy in its quest for a separate identity. It is now difficult to buy the argument that there was only one way to develop, the Western way. The endeavour to modernize, which had sought to maximize the openness of every wing of the human enterprise to every other wing, is endangered in the post-modern or regionalizing period that we are describing. 'It is indeed true', as Dasgupta says in this volume, 'that the Indian elite's attempt to buy the American activist relationship with history and to sell it, in the teaching mode, to the population does begin to break down under the define the changes that are taking place in the post-modern era. In order to understand the shift taking place today, one obviously has to ask a number of WH-questions, the answers to which change as one moves from the modern to the post-modern moment of the As I see it, in order to understand the 'post-modernist' approach to life, language, literature or development, we have to realize that 'the transformational grammar of the psyche, of economics, of language itself were yet to be construed, and only with those revisions do we begin to understand how difficult the labour of suspicion is . . . at the edge of postmodernism, then, no idea or theory or word or even feeling is above suspicion, and whatever Postmodernist does or says seems to take that fact, perhaps only

In this first book in our series on language and development,

Dasgupta ventures into a not-so-well understood area which grammar, literature, and social science have neglected as a barren buffer zone. He is raising here a new type of question, viz.: What does English in India mean that Indian languages do not? He is dealing not with meaning, but content paired with expression. This book, then, offers an interpretation of the presence of the English language in India. It comments on the logic and mode of this presence. A study of this kind is surely educative for any systematic analysis of the use of English in any non-Anglophone country in the Third World.

Dasgupta argues here with conviction and courage that in the modern phase, Indians are learning the modern religion (its principles of science and practice of technology) from its Western high priests in order to acquire direct access to the divine possibility of In the post-modern moment, this description of the elite in India learning about the scientific and technological development from the West in English and teaching it to the gullible masses in their languages has given way to a group of collectivities in Bharat learning from each other the lesson of social modernity, and developing a form of public life which is suitable for such a heterogeneous population. The Indian elite is surely a part of this glomeration which sincerely believes that it is still engaged in bringing in modernization inaugurated by the British Raj, although the others in the collectivities reserve the right to humour this miniscule minority but let it continue to think so even while it steadily loses: its elitehood. In the process, the learners define themselves in segmental terms, on the basis of ethnicity, region or caste or the rural-urban divide, besides religion or any combination of these. The power game which creates the configuration of such community boundary demarcations from time to time is the multi-segmental narrative of independent Bharat's politics.

The theoretical point of departure of this book is presented in Dasgupta 1988 where he suggests that linguistics becomes a social science only when we agree that the native speaker of a language has in his or her mind not only an internal representation of L that enables S to use L, but also an E, an external representation which embodies S's awareness of the community's joint possession of L as represented in I. The paper proposes that S allows a non-formal image of L, an external representation of the discourse embodying

L, to serve as E. Thus E is the site where a psychosocially real image of L is posited and imagined. This hypothesis then takes E close to Discourse, and states that the discourse in E cannot be adequately described by any one of the following or by any combination thereof: generative grammar, socio-linguistics, and literary theory. This is true even if they are extended into new domains. Each of the above disciplines revolves around a specific cardinal point: Generative grammar is based on the belief that there is a homogeneous community of ideal speaker-hearers of L; Literary theory works on the basis of an illusory total expressivity and receptivity throughout the community; and socio-linguistics is committed to social action aimed at overcoming inequalities of linguistic privilege either through upward social movement of groups or individuals, or through levellings of various kinds that range from conscious language engineering to language attrition. But they all clearly demonstrate that the unity as such is an imposed quality, and such an imposed theoretical homogeneity does not have the required expressive power.

Generative grammar's characterization of the speaker's freedom, and of the unprescribed and unbounded knowledge of language, and emphasis or privileging of speech rather than writing as the mode of language use where native speakers can tap their authentic personal creativity in terms of intuitive judgements; or, Socio-linguistics' pride in eliciting the unguarded speech and demonstrating that it differs from what they say, and their claim that the grammatical model itself bears the taint of artificial imposition of a unity which never exists, and the Literary theoreticians' resistance to the imposition of any 'ordinary' or 'normal' order of language norms. Literary theory articulates the structure of memorability whereby a community chooses to write or publish texts, and the community picks out some texts as especially central to its memory. Here the difficulty is in the characterization of the literary archive A and of the privileged canonical sub-archive C for the language L is in general not coextensive with what an individual needs to know to count as a speaker of L. Such knowledge would have been E.

All the three were rooted in the same original idea of resisting the hegemony of a written standard imposed by the elite as the authority of language. In fact, the overdeveloped technical apparatus of all these theories becomes so mechanical, and preventive of any worthwhile dialogue, and are so much engaged in an imaginary imposition of a false linguistic unity that Dasgupta rightly compares their obsession with that of a war-machine. Quite aptly, Dasgupta brings in an important parallel from a memorable 1933 opera of Tagore (taSer deS, or The Cardland), the chessmen are used as a metaphor for the stratified castes in the Hindu society, where an adventurous prince and his friend (the merchant's son), are ship-wrecked, and come across some very strange and rigid customs of this peculiar cardland, laugh at them, bring the cards to their senses, and remind them of their human naturalness. The satire, directed against externally imposed forms of order, is a parallel to the problems faced by these three disciplines.

However, even if one sets E aside as a mirage, one may prefer to listen to whatever snatches of discourse come one's way. Some of these discourses will be closer to one's self, whereas there are bound to be the elements of the other to varying degrees. The communication matrix of India identifies for English-in-India the role of an other, and hence this volume on the otherness of English.

## 11. THE PLURALISTIC PARADIGM

Whether one considers music, for instance, the classical dhrupad and dhaamaar period gives way, in the middle ages, to the khayaal and thumrii, or the origins of literature in the popular recodification of the Ramayana and the Mahabharata in the middle ages, where the trans-regional epics get pluralized in specific regional contexts, our history-making tends towards an ideal of diffusion, not of compulsive focusing. The rhythms of the verse renderings of the epics into regional languages characterized the aesthetics of this enterprise.

The picture is one of different kinds of people listening to the same basic inheritance but hearing different signals and thus translating the base into different sub-community identities, scattering the pre-existent and thus always available human unity into a whole zoo of little normative languages. If the American approach to history-making is an activist model, one may call the Bharatiya approach a receptionist model. Here, the production is not the main point. The main issue is ensuring that all segments of a population can flow in their appropriate histories at a pace they feel comfortable with, with as little loss of life and pleasure as possible.

I shall, therefore, suggest that in developmental planning one must take a pluralistic paradigm seriously, where identification and observation of language problems are essentially classificatory, the description of language and education planning strategies is essentially based on our understanding of planning typology and on whether they are comprehensive or partial, global or local, predictive or predicative, or a combination of these strategies (cf. Singh 1992). Which of these will serve our purpose, and offer an explanation for a strategy of language development will depend on what propositions one accepts for drafting, implementing, evaluating, modifying and recasting policy decisions.

Let us elaborate on how exactly such a pluralistic view on language development can be supported and instantiated. In several chapters in this book, Dasgupta talks about the need to develop an adequate apparatus for 'listening' which can cross discipline boundaries without giving rise to conceptual oxymorons, and which can tell us about the community's linguistic self-image. Such an apparatus then employs components of the relevant disciplines, but does not endorse any overall linguistic or literary dogma or any of the socio-linguistic approaches, since they have achieved closure by withdrawing from dialogical contact with the general discourse and with each other. The method being mentioned here will be that of diffuse listening as well as our correspondingly plural expository apparatus—a tradition which goes back to the medieval ages when India's regional languages emerged as separate foci of linguistic identification. This works through what Dasgupta calls FESH or the Formal Elaboration of Social Hierarchy. His central proposal is that the post-modern transition is from a teaching mode to a learning mode, making it apparent that development can proceed only to the extent that the process takes place at the pleasure of the people. One way to approach the key concept of pleasure is to see the newly self-confident public in the light of their recovery of the right to self-identification. This kernel idea brought Dasgupta closer to Lele and Singh (1989) and Habermas (1984) that social and individual modernization is a process of maximization of learning and openness (cf. Singh 1987c for another interpretation of openness).

## 12. THE IMAGES AND THE EQUATION

Let us consider the several images that we have of ourselves. We clearly have two faces: India and Bharat. First, consider the facts that the India image corresponds to a teacher-centred equation between teaching and learning, whereas the Bharat image is associated with a learning game, where the learner as a person defines himself or herself in terms of what strikes him or her as easy or pleasant or readily accessible. Second, learning takes place not in the institutional set-up where one couples it with teaching. Our learner knows that the torrential rains of our minds always wash away much of what we pick up from any source and stops worrying about the exact identities of the items that stay or get inundated, satisfied with the job of working with whatever comes his or her way. In our third domain, modernization, India has been the proverbial backwater of the world, always getting everything second hand, troubled about isms decades after their Western salespersons had disappeared, content to tag along with others and to accept their definitions of modernity which define India's behaviour as a case of tagging along. Bharat has been one of the world leaders, unselfconsciously practising all along what the avant-garde modernization theorists today are at last beginning to preach, namely, the formally bridled pursuit of pleasure in its style of modernization. Bharat has given birth to the art of non-violence, non-cooperation, non-action, work-to-rule, gherao or relay hunger strike, etc., as a way of driving opponents up the wall, and has institutionalized the culture of bandhs and festive agitations during comfortable hours of the day. Finally, the Bharat image openly and justifiably rejects the standard notion of development involving the unquestioning adoption of the completely time-bound, labour-based working style associated with prototypical cases of industrialization in the sense of the nineteenth century experience in the West. The aggregate here intend to bend the theory of development to suit this style.

The new forces are pushing society towards a certain contextualization which will situate different types of working time in specific niches of a cultural ecology of activity; it is driven by a public discourse in which conversations and shrutis jointly define contexts by coding them in terms of a normativity. The main interest of the traditional view lies in its segmental heterogenization of time and its formalization of the play of segments. The tradition chops time up into segments such as ages in the cycle from epiphany to deluge. In other words, the cosmos, which chooses to diversify the flows of time itself in different ages, is portrayed as being playfully pleased to do so, and this pleasure is in principle the same as what a human individual experiences during play. The culture of Bharat handles and sustains diversity by formalizing plurality in terms of stylization; its habit of stringing segments together into cycles, spectra, and hierarchies enables it to cope with the multiplicity and heterogeneity of styles.

The public actively listens to the texts and rereads them by speaking them into forms of personal life for which the bottom line, as in all cultures, is the contours of pleasure marking out what most members of the community find pleasant or comfortable. The way the public controls its gurus is by effecting a double mythicization. First, it glorifies the guru and second, it refuses to participate even vicariously in the academic discourse of the textuality from which the gurus derive their sermons. This process is a hypothetico-deductive method, which first posits the availability of some classical text and then enlists the aid of translators who help the public to derive viable styles of living from whatever bits of the text they feel they can live with.

Under the sovereign but partial domination of Sanskrit, the lower echelons of the formally elaborated social hierarchy evolved a sense of relaxation and ease which gave the system an astonishing degree of durability. This process involved a relocation of the centre of gravity of the culture from the H embodiment of the hierarchies to their L foundations, from Sanskrit to the regional languages. This recentring makes the receptionist approach to histories and futures—an approach which implicitly emphasized their plurality from the very start—more explicitly pluralistic and stylizing, and turns it into what is potentially a tool today for a realignment of global cultural forces.

The themes explored throughout this volume revolve around the use of the English word Auntie in contemporary India. In a recent study carried out in Bangalore Kamal K. Sridhar (1989; esp. chapter 8) showed that '"aunty" [...] functions as a marker of Westernized sophistication among the upwardly mobile middle classes in urban and semi-urban India'. This and comparable terms are used in Indian English for the construction of social affiliations which would, in the Euro-American Anglophone world, normally be constructed in non-organic, abstract terms, indicated by very formal terms of address.

The use of auntie and uncle in Indian English—among the school-going children who address their classmates' parents reflects one aspect of the FESH, viz., the use of the model of extended kinship in the construction of broader social networks. It only shows that English is not 'one of us', but an important presence that one must be polite to; and Auntie is the way we express our politeness in our current social conjuncture; so the term 'Auntie Tongue' best expresses what English is to its users in India, because we live in a society that makes this the principal model of social affiliation, treats the home, or the site where the family is built and sustained, as the formal centre of social institutionality.

In particular, English is held at a formal distance from the L level of socio-linguistic structure, and at the same time there are no distinct boundaries sharply and non-negotiably specifying types of English that can be used. The utter separateness of English from the Indian languages lies in the fact that the distance keeps the L level, with its Indian languages, cool and relaxed, unaffected by the tightness of the technicality of English proper. While the particular fortunes of this or that language may vary because of underspecification, the fact of distance between H and L does not. Thus, the distance between English as a donor and the Indian receptor discourses remains stable. English is a stable adjunct to the Indian discursive system. The open, equalitarian invitation that this naturalism addresses to tradition-bound hierarchies will ultimately be heeded even in recalcitrant areas like Asia. Thus, it is important to show that the point is not that Indians are afraid to receive English truly into their homes and hearts, but that the realities of this language are incompatible with such a reception, making it a non-option.

English is not a space but it is an object the managers of which try and enforce normative spelling, punctuation, grammar, and phonological and lexical limits throughout the domains of English discourse. Indian use of English will forever remain a tolerated, degenerate variant of the norm in the eyes of the owners. This is why the distance remains stable. Those managers of English in India who represent the wishes of its proprietors are quite strict about maintaining the normative standards in the most distinctly proprietary domains of orthography and phonology. These screening devices effectively distinguish the few insiders, welcomed into the fold of the managers of English in India, from the many outsiders excluded from this fold.

We have not shown that this field of forces has anything to do with modernization. Earlier, we characterized the post-modern moment as the point at which modernization takes place at the pleasure of the people. Even if the Indian model of modernity treats the family as prototypical and institutions as extensions of kinship, this model can still count as a universalistic, non-exclusive, open model of rationality, as a prototype of what happens in the case of post-modernization.

At this point, I would like to recall the three kinds of politics with which I characterized such a post-modern attitude to life and language a few years ago (cf. Singh 1989; 1987: 164-80). I said then that the changes from a modern to a post-modern stage has been brought about in terms of politics of knowledge, politics of choice, and politics of change.

What I said under the characterization labelled as politics of knowledge has similarity with the position of Habermas (1984) as quoted by Lele and Singh (1989) and Dasgupta in this volume, although I was not aware of this conceptualization of openness. I had said that in the post-modern era, there is a clear shift from the secretive attitude towards greater openness. In the initial stages of modernism, we find knowledge to be the prerogative of a select few. Acquisition, cultivation, storage, and retrievability of knowledge were marked with secrecy and exclusiveness. Knowledge was transmitted only in terms of schools, clans and families. In many cases, we find knowledge being stored orally, or in formalizations difficult to penetrate. In the post-modern world, knowledge is becoming, to a great extent, open and universal. I said 'to a great extent', because the economics of knowledge and technology transfer will delay the day when it can be fully open. The politics of choice tells us that the favourite principle of modernism was that it had to be anti-choice (by virtue of being monistic in nature): all-embracing empires (in the field of administration), large nation-states with vast colonies (geo-politics), monistic religious and cultural empires (world-view), patented, or call it by a more fashionable name—standardized forms of literature, art, music and other forms of human expressions (creativity), and an all-pervasive standard form of language—be it Sanskrit, Latin, or English (communication). In all aspects of life, monism was considered to be ideal and desirable. It is still considered to be so by a vast number of development planners. One can offer many quotes from Fishman, Neustupny or early Ferguson in support of this claim, to substantiate it from the work of language planners of the West. However, if we turn away from language planning literature, and look at the history of Western cultures, sciences, technology and economics, we see that there was an unprecedented spurt in development in each of these fields only when the monistic institutions and tendencies were relegated to the background. I have shown elsewhere (Singh 1987c: 164-72) how in the context of Indian painting schools and musical traditions, pluralism brought in enormous changes in both style and content. This shift from one to many in sharing of powers, privileges, opportunities, and possibilities among languages, cultures, and societies is a gift of the post-modern approach.

Finally, there is also a politics of change. Alisjahbana (1976) proposes that the human mind is specially endowed with a capacity to evaluate its surrounding world (including itself) in contrast to animal behaviour in terms of six values: theoretical (which refers to identification of things and processes), economic (their utilization), religious (aiming at the holy), aesthetic (aiming at beauty), power and solidarity. He combines the religious and aesthetic processes which he calls the aesthetic aspect of culture. The power and solidarity values make up its organizational aspect. A progressive culture will emphasize on the theoretical and economic values, whereas an expressive culture will lay special emphasis on the religious and the aesthetic values. According to Alisjahbana, many countries in the Asian region have begun changing from being expressive to progressive only recently. In this context, I will say that post-modernism will entail a shift from the power (or hierarchical) value to the solidarity (democratic) value, although I am not sure that the only way to develop will be to move away from the 'expressive' to the 'progressive'. In short, I identified skepticism, scienticism (cf. Lang 1986), openness (Habermas 1984; Singh 1987), pluralism (Singh 1992), and democratization (Singh 1989) to be the cardinal characteristics of post-modernism, and this is the developmental goal that I called the Prakritization of language and literature (cf. Singh 1991); and it is not exactly an antonym of Sanskritization as in Srinivas 1956).

If the Indian style we speak of is a genuinely open style and not a piece of antiquity of the variety that the reactionary Hindu militants want to unleash on us, then why does our formulation of the model appeal to the Sanskrit language and de-Sanskritization as the process of pluralization at all? The claim is that India gave up classical languages in the middle ages, not just at the language-code level but at the level of discourse, self-definition, and rationality. India confines the English-linked discourse of technical causalities to the marketplace today just as, in the middle ages, it confined the classical discourse of determinate, sacred and administrative regularities to special, classically expressible areas of life. Our L norms are associated with the unsystematizable, slow, heterogeneous narratives of identity, the cultural narratives of the Users. Even at the level of the H normativities, this country has been offering its most widely visible textual articulations of thought. Hence, for instance, twentieth century India's massive analytical-discursive output in English, making this country one of the most voluminous publishers in that language. Our Ls do not stifle the H. But Independent India's expressive selfhood is finding expression in the Indian languages, a point which, as Dasgupta correctly states here, can be appreciated only 'by listing many Indian-language masterpieces of art (including literature), criticism, and analysis whose level has seldom or never been approached by any twentieth-century work in English, a listing of which would look out of place . . . For the standard games we play depend on the assumption that such masterpieces cannot exist.'

But we know that they do. Let the other worlds make efforts to know that is knowable.

## REFERENCES

Alisjahbana, S. Takdir. 1976. Language Planning for Modernization. The Hague: Mouton.

Basu, Durga Das. 1977. Constitutional Law of India. New Delhi: Prentice Hall of India Pvt. Ltd.

Calhoun, Craig J. 1976. Education and the problem of continuity. In: The Anthropology of Education, C.J. Calhoun and Francis A.I. Ianni (eds.). The Hague: Mouton, pp. 327-45.

Census of India. 1971. Government of India. New Delhi.

Chaturvedi, M.G. and B.V. Mohale. 1976. The Position of Languages in School Curriculum in India. New Delhi.

Dasgupta, P. 1988. The external reality of linguistic descriptions. Canadian Journal of Linguistics, 33: 4, pp. 345-65.

Dua, Hans Raj. 1985. Language Planning in India. New Delhi: Harnam Publication.

Deutsch, Karl W. 1953. Nationalism and Social Communication. Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press.

Government of India. 1949. Report of the University Education Commission. New Delhi: Ministry of Education.

Habermas, J. 1984. The Theory of Communicative Action. Vol. 1: Reason and the Rationalization of Society. (Tr. T. McCarthy). London: Heinemann.

Hardiman, M. and J. Midgley. 1982. The Social Dimensions of Development: Social Policy and Planning in the Third World. Chichester: Wiley.

Kelman, Herbert C. 1971. Language as an aid and barrier to involvement in the national system. In: Can Language be Planned? Joan Rubin and Bjorn H. Jernudd (eds.). Honolulu: The University Press of Hawaii, pp. 21-51.

Khubchandani, L.M. 1981. Language Education and Social Justice. Pune: Centre

——————— 1983. Plural Languages, Plural Cultures: Communication, Identity, and Sociopolitical Change in Contemporary India. Honolulu: East-West Centre.

Lang, Berel. 1986. Post-modernism in philosophy: Nostalgia for the future, waiting for the past. New Literary History, 18:1, pp. 209-23.

Lele, J.K. and R. Singh. 1989. Language and Society: Steps Towards an Integrated Theory. Leiden: Brill.

Literacy Statistics at a Glance. 1979. New Delhi: Directorate of Adult Education.

MacPherson, S. and J. Midgley. 1987. Comparative Social Policy and the Third World. Sussex: Wheatsheaf Books and New York: St. Martin's Press.

Mandi, Peter. 1980. Self-reliance and education policy in developing countries. In: European Studies in Development: New Trends in European Development Studies, Jacques de Bandt, Peter Mandi and Dudley Seers (eds.). London: The Macmillan Press Ltd, pp. 213-20.

Midgley, J. 1987. Need and deprivation in developing societies: A profile. In: Comparative Social Policy and the Third World, Stewart MacPherson and James Midgley (eds.). Sussex: Wheatsheaf Books and New York: St. Martin's Press, pp. 5-15.

Morawetz, D. 1977. Twenty-five Years of Economic Development 1950 to 1975. Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press.

Pandit, P.B. 1973. India as a Sociolinguistic Area. Poona: Deccan College. P.D. Gune Memorial Lectures.

——————— 1977. Language in a Plural Society. Delhi: Dev Raj Chanana Memorial Committee.

Pattanayak, D.P. 1981. Multilingualism and Mothertongue Education. Delhi: Oxford University Press.

——————— 1986. On being and becoming bilingual in India. In: The Fergusonian Impact, Vol. 2, J.A. Fishman et al. (eds.). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.

Purkait, B.R. 1987. New Education in India. Ambala: The Associated Publication.

Sharp, H. 1920. Selections from Education Records, Part 1: 1781-1839. Bureau of Education.

Singh, Udaya Narayana. 1987a. On language development: The Indian perspective. Paper presented at the Fifteenth International Congress of Linguistics, Berlin. 10-15 August.

——————— 1987b. On some issues in Indian multilingualism. In: Perspectives in Language Planning, Udaya Narayana Singh and R.N. Srivastava (eds.). Calcutta: Mithila Darshan, pp. 153-65.

——————— 1987c. Uttar-adhunikata: bangla kabitar prakritayan. Lal NakSatra.

——————— 1989. Development of modern Indian languages and literatures: The role of English as an instrument of social change in South Asia. Paper presented at the International Conference on English in South Asia. Asia Foundation and UGC of Pakistan, Islamabad. 4-9 January.

——————— 1991. bhaSar janala theke—sahityake. In: bangla kabitar prakritayan: uttaradhunik kabita, Birendra Chakrabarty (ed.). Calcutta: Granthalay.

——————— 1992. On Language Development and Planning Towards a Pluralistic Paradigm. Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal.

Sridhar, K.K. 1989. English in Indian Bilingualism. Delhi: Manohar.

Srinivas, M.N. 1956. A note on Sanskritization and Westernization. Far Eastern.

Srivastava, R.N. 1983. Literacy in South Asia. Mimeo.

Tagore, R.N. 1933. taSer deS. Calcutta: Visvabharati. [Eng. tr. by K. Kripalani 1939: Tasher Desh or Kingdom of cards. Visvabharati Quarterly (new

UNESCO. 1953. The Use of Vernacular Languages in Education. Monographs on Fundamental Education, 8. Paris: UNESCO.

——————— 1975. Yearbook 1986. Statistical Yearbook. Paris: UNESCO.

——————— 1978. Literacy in Asia: A Continuing Challenge. Bangkok.

Wood, H.B. 1976. Agents of education and development in Nepal. In: The Anthropology of Education, C.J. Calhoun, and F.A.J. Ianni (eds.). The Hague: Mouton, pp. 147-58.