# Heteronomy

## 3.1 The Non-Substantiality of Indian English

One difference between English in post-modern India and Sanskrit in the Gupta empire lies in the sphere of the creative expression of the cultural reality of India. Classical India's Sanskrit exhibited independent, substantial creativity; our India's English is anaphoric to the creativity of metropolitan English and quite devoid of independent creativity. The present section provides evidence that this is so. The rest of the chapter adumbrates an analysis of the reasons for this absence of independent creativity.

Speaking to a journalist in 1990, the Indian pop singer Suneeta Rao said, "We (pop singers) are riding on the wave of pop and heading for a promising future. Pop exists today as an undeniable force in the world of music. It is fast moving and lyrical. I know that a majority of Indians can't enjoy English pop music because they don't know the language. So now our indigenous pop stars are turning more and more to dialects." One presumes that by 'dialects' she means Indian languages. It seems from her testimony that the Indians who 'know the language', i.e., English, and are willing and able to buy Indian English pop music, are not only far from being a majority, but are not even a big enough group to make Indian English pop a viable enterprise.

The article which features her statement, 'Zippy, zany Indian pop world' (unsigned, Deccan Chronicle, Sunday supplement, 15 July 1990, pp. 1 and 5) also gives us the views of another Indian pop singer, Shweta Shetty: "Indian pop has to be an amalgamation of original western music and Indian lyrics", says Shetty who dropped out of college at 19 to pursue a career in the performing arts. "The whole outlook of college education seemed so absurd to me that I decided to let it pass," says Shetty. "The daily gossip sessions and canteen binges left me disgusted... When I was doing Last Tango in Heaven, someone from CBS contacted me to do an album with them. I had never dabbled in Hindi pop but I realized this was where the money was and where I would have a future." A third witness cited in the same article is Sharon Prabhakar, wife of ad person Alyque Padamsee. Although apparently 'it was the quest for a distinct identity that landed her in Indian English pop music', Prabhakar is quoted as saying, "I started in English, switched to Hindi and have my theatre chugging along." Notice that all three witnesses are functioning, and are saying others in the market must function, in Indian languages; one of them has even switched over from English. No cases are cited, in that article or elsewhere, of any pop singer who started in an Indian language and then switched to English (although one could easily imagine singers doing such a thing and saying that they had done it because that was what a qualitatively or quantitatively desirable section of the public was looking for)—a significant asymmetry. It thus seems clear that the take-off of pop music in India has been primarily in the Indian languages rather than English (though Indian English pop does exist, on a small scale). The experiences of the Western world, where pop and other light musical forms have taken over much of the personal discursive space occupied earlier by poetry, and the case of Bengal, where the post-modern period saw a spectacular rise of the culture of Tagore songs and a corresponding growth of musical lyrics as a powerful rival to poetry in the domain of serious personal discourse, indicate that the non-emergence of an original Indian English musical enterprise on a non-trivial scale is an extremely significant fact. It is to be interpreted, no doubt, in the context of the Anglicized Indian elite's generally passive response to Western classical music and dance and overall positive relationship with the Indian classical genres in the performing arts.

Another major missing domain is the cinema. Despite the Ivory-Merchant productions and some stray ventures, it is universally recognized that the Indian English film neither exists as a regular genre nor has come up with even exceptional individual achievements which portray any significant aspect of the reality of India, present or past.

Again, it is common knowledge that cinema is one of the vital media and one that the real existence of a language in a post-modern society cannot dispense with. Indian English's non-relationship with the cinema is thus a clear indication that the presence of English in India, for all its superficial quantity, is a purpose-bound presence, not a free existence that truly taps the normal range of human self-expression.

We now turn to literature, a domain where certain authors believe Indian English creativity has some success stories to narrate. Our discussion can afford to be brief. Indian English writing has not yet produced any poets or narrators with a serious poetics or narratology (a theory of the site of language/tradition/literature) of their own—a non-emergence that would have been unthinkable in the case of a real language of creative expression existing in the twentieth century (and necessarily responding to modernism and its perils), and can only be explained by the hypothesis that Indian writing in English is not a case of direct creative self-expression by a community. Some evidence for this hypothesis comes from the Indian language book markets: the general Indian public does not seem inclined to read (and thus nobody produces or publishes) translations of the supposed classics of Indian English poetry and fiction; this indicates that the public does not believe—having no self-serving reasons for doing so—that there are any true classics in that body of work.

If there has thus been no major creative statement in Indian English, this is certainly not due to any lack of effort. On the contrary, many intelligent persons have been trying with much zeal, for more than a century, to attain such success, with the assiduity of scientists trying to crack a problem. They deserve, at the very least, our gratitude for having demonstrated beyond reasonable doubt that the Indian English writer is able to scale genuinely creative peaks only as an expatriate, living in (or in ever-attentive contact with) an English-speaking country and attached, as a migrant, to its community, in the manner of Joseph Conrad. This is part of the evidence for the fact (which some readers, who are hereby invited to offer a plausible explanation for the cinematic, musical, and critical-theoretical sterility, may prefer to call the claim) that post-modern India's English, in contrast to classical India's Sanskrit, has been a failure as far as independent creative expression is concerned.

This specific feature of Indian English calls for explanation. Our strategy will be to seek the key to it in the nature of Indian English as a code/discourse.

## 3.2 English as a Code: The Moment of Lal

We will begin the study of this code/discourse in dialogue with the scholars whose influential work on and for English as a code in India has presided over the academic and literary efforts, since the 1950s, to put the Indian use of English on the world map: Braj B. Kachru in linguistics and Purushottam Lal in literature. Of necessity, we shall deal less with Lal than with Kachru, who has been the chief theoretical commentator on Indian English. But it is useful to begin with the point that even Lal, contrary to what his literary background might have led one to suppose, has in fact thematized the code aspect of English, not a discursive tradition of Indian English writing.

Writing in 1951, Lal chronicled 'an upsurge in Indo-Anglian poetry going on for the last three years' which was 'not a mere revival', for 'It revives nothing, being a start from scratch, perhaps even from a minus condition' (1951/1987: 20). By this he meant that his generation was undertaking such writing as a new project, unconnected to that of Sarojini Naidu, Harindranath Chattopadhyaya, and Sri Aurobindo, and that what was new about the project was his generation's willingness to live with the particularity of the modern urban experience as the only content Indian English authors could validly speak of, as all efforts to speak for the countryside or to explore classical Indian intellectual themes were doomed.

Lal argued 'that Indo-Anglians [of the earlier generation] failed for the most part because they confused mechanical ti-tum ti-tum with metre, and tinkly rhyme with music' (p. 23). In support of this argument, he adduced some data from Sarojini Naidu. In contrast, Lal says of his own generation: 'In technique Indo-Anglian poets strive towards a ruthlessness and tightness and greater economy of expression, reminiscent to some extent of the aims of the Imagists'

A careful reader of these passages, attentive to discourse-theoretic considerations of the sort discussed in the previous chapter, will conclude that Lal does not postulate even a potentially autonomous Indo-Anglian discourse. He is offering the medium, an unproblematically available 'English', as a code ready for Indian use. Impatiently rejecting the work of pre-independence authors, who were bad users because they did not adequately learn the rules of what had then been the contemporary game of 'English', Lal holds up as a model his own generation's more effective emulation of 'Imagism' and command over a technical structure that makes concepts like trochaic trimetre available to the poet, allusions to Swinburne, Eliot or the Georgian period available to the critic dealing with specific texts, and the sidelining of the Indian countryside (p. 26)—on the grounds that Naidu's 'clever romanticizing of the Indian peasant' (p. 22) is for some reason the only option open to writers committed to 'the whole fabric of our national life' (p. 26), an option that should be eschewed for poetic reasons—available to the metacritic dealing with the Indo-Anglian literary enterprise as a whole.

The conclusion that Lal represents a view of 'English' as a ready-made literary code for 'us' to use effectively is reinforced when we find him, in a 1959 polemical article, explaining to his interlocutor Jyotirmoy Datta that 'If Mr Datta believes that English is not more developed than Swahili or Pustu for the purposes of creative communication in the context of the contemporary literary milieu, that, in other words, it cannot communicate—other factors being equal—a wider range of feelings and appeal to a more cultivated sensibility than Swahili or Pustu can, why, he is entitled to his belief as much as we are entitled to ours' (1959/1987: 12-13).

In the build-up leading to this statement, Lal is even more explicit:

But, humbly, very humbly, I should like to suggest that a language shows its mature quality in terms of the emotional spectrum it can successfully communicate without blurring. There are always over-reachers who will take up crude dialects and inject them with a range of feeling that dazzles even a sophisticated reader. Such geniuses are rare; most of us have to make do with what we have and, as the Workshop letter to Quest said, we are 'lucky' to have English rich. (p. 12)

Now, we have already been told that the writings of Toru Dutt, Sri Aurobindo, Harindranath Chattopadhyaya, and Sarojini Naidu do not form a part of 'English' being 'rich'. It follows, then, that there is no tradition to build on: independent India's writing in English is 'a start from scratch' (cited earlier): it does not continue an existing Indian discourse, but makes use of 'English', a richly expressive code unproblematically available to certain Indians, in a new project, emulating the technical and substantive standards associated with that code.

Obviously, the proposal is that Indian writing in English should be frankly anaphoric to the metropolitan antecedent discourses backing the currency of references to trochaic trimetre, Eliot, the Georgians, and Imagism, and underwriting the explicit and implicit admonitions—not to woo the unenlightened countryside, not to 'deviate into the nebulous mystical metaphysics of Sri Aurobindo', not to dabble in the forgettable classical Indian theories of poetics or language.

This anaphoric dependence on the naturalist paradigm of the modern West (a naturalism crumbling in our post-modern times) appears also in Lal's truly memorable statement, in his polemical 1959 piece mentioned before, that 'About this there should be no doubt—we write in English because we feel we are "doin" what just comes natcherly' (1959/87: 17). To the naturalist eye, only the code or system can exist, as an instrument to be used; the action of using a code cannot be conceptualized in terms of discursive practice, and thus discourse theory is unavailable as a framework. Lal's interlocutor Datta was a fellow member of the naturalist paradigm still prevalent, which confined their debate on Indian English writing to the motifs of organic rootedness versus individual expressive freedom, with Datta saying that 'we' cannot use 'English' effectively for serious literature and Lal saying that 'we' can. Trapped in such a time-free subject-object paradigm, the debaters could not even begin to situate codes and their putative users in the context of evolving relations between discourses. The human dimension of the ways in which their naturalist zeitgeist circumscribed the debate becomes visible when Lal informs me (letter of 28 July 1990) that 'doin' what just comes natcherly' was a quote from a song in the then current film Annie Get Your Gun. It is not only theories that carry the conceptual compulsions of one's times.

## 3.3 Indian English: The Moment of Kachru

In one's journey from the literary naturalism of a P. Lal or Meenakshi Mukherjee (Mukherjee 1971) to the linguistic naturalism of a Braj B. Kachru, one must cross a major gap in the naturalist argument, even though Kachru too chooses to focus on the writer and literary part of the corpus in his analysis of Indian English and ends up dealing with much the same material as Lal and Mukherjee. We can learn a lot by examining the gap with some care. The gap is already apparent when Lal (1951/1987: 25) quietly points out that, 'though there is experimentation' in the Indo-Anglian poetry of 1948-51, 'there is no deliberate eccentricity or leg-pulling. Use of a language not very familiar tends to restrict indulgence in the kind of superb varied perversities one associates with a linguistic juggler like E.E. Cummings.' Note the admission that English in India is a 'not very familiar' language and that this constrains the range of play available to an Indian poet in English.

The gap becomes wider when 'Indian English' becomes a semi-pejorative designation for uneducated or semiliterate usage, as in Lal 1951/1987: 226-27 saying that, in order to 'maintain a standard of writing in Indo-Anglian poetry' that strikes him and his circle as 'valid and valuable', it is necessary to write in 'a vital language', a notion he elucidates by declaring: 'King's English, yes; Indian English, permissible; pidgin, bombastic, and gluey English, no'. (The variant at 1959/87: 18 has 'King's and Queen's English, yes; Indian English, why not?; pidgin, inflated and gluey English, no'.)

A literary rejection of the social base of Indian English writing—the largely 'pidgin, inflated and gluey' writing and speech which quantitatively, in real-life India, far outweighs the high quality English of Lal's dreams—is associated, then, with a tacit resistance to any valorizing use of the term 'Indian English' for what could be regarded as 'valid and valuable' writing.

Such resistance comes out into the open—and, with it, the gap separating the literary from the linguistic version of the naturalist world-view—when Meenakshi Mukherjee directly attacks Kachru's project: 'one cannot postulate "Indian English" based on examples drawn from Indo-Anglian writers [. . .]. The Indo-Anglian writer should be allowed the freedom to experiment with the language for his own artistic needs rather than be heaved into a system of linguistics in search of that elusive medium—a standard Indian

This passage, cited by Kachru (1983: 77), elicits his censure as a linguist: 'one is confronting a confusion between language use and prescriptivism', he says. 'Standard Indian English is no more "elusive" than is standard American English or standard West African English. An individual author experiments with the style repertoire which a speech community uses, whether for "artistic" or practical needs. In the description of language use, "artistic needs" for creative use of language are as much a part of the total range of language use as is purely functional use (e.g., in ordering one's meal)." This crucial disagreement brings out the gap between literary and linguistic naturalism.

The gap is of great interest. The literary critic and the linguist, working with the same texts, are led by the same naturalism to take irreconcilably different positions as to the very existence of Indian English as an object of study!

Let us take a closer look at the logic of the problem. A literary naturalist seeks, in the words of Lal (1951/1987: 227), 'a vital language', and must empathize, as a peer-critic, with his or her colleagues' literary efforts to come up with valid textual representations of verbalizable life. Accordingly, Lal and Mukherjee empathize with and, as good naturalists, describe faithfully their authors' gravitation towards metropolitan English as the only standard-setter, coupled with a necessary rejection of the Indian base which the metropolis has consistently found marginal or amusing. In this striving to meet metropolitan standards, the authors Lal and Mukherjee empathize with cannot afford to see themselves as using Indian English as a literary medium.

But a linguistic naturalist seeks to portray the life of a language as a whole, its use in all sectors of society. When Kachru looks at the literary texts, it is as a conveniently assembled initial body of data belonging to the larger corpus of the written and spoken use of English by Indians. It is thus natural of him—and naturalistic—to assume that the authors use, as their medium, 'the style repertoire which [their] speech community uses' (p. 77), as a repertoire belonging to a language-fabric which reasonable analysts can only call Indian English, with a spectrum ranging from the peaks of what is accepted as the best speech and writing to the valleys and pits of what is not. The peaks would normally be taken to constitute the standard variety of Indian English, if we apply the rules of linguistics, which Mukherjee has not been able to persuade linguists to modify, as she has not offered any arguments against the usual theories of standardization. If English as it is spoken in India is a natural language, then normal linguistics, examining it, is bound to arrive at Kachru's conclusion that there is an Indian English, an independent object of description that comes into its own after the political ties with England are severed in 1947. Since that year, the speakers of English in India have been on their own in their use and reproduction of the language: they are a bona fide speech community.

The naturalism that leads Lal to reject earlier positive assessments of Naidu as due to 'extrapoetic' reasons and the naturalism that leads Kachru to 'postulate Indian English' (as Mukherjee puts it) are the same framework. They tell the linguist to look at language as just language and the critic to look at poetry as just poetry. The resulting analyses turn out to be irreconcilable. Thus, naturalism seems to harbour an antinomy which makes an integrated analysis impossible. This is the lesson to be learnt, apparently, from the gap between Lal's and Mukherjee's work and Kachru's.

But perhaps this reading of the problem is too hasty. What if, contrary to Kachru's assumption, the users of English in India do not constitute a speech community? Then the problem with his application of linguistic methods lies not in the naturalist paradigm underwriting his methods, but in the object of study, which is arguably not a true speech community. Perhaps what he considers the Indian English speech community is in fact just an aggregation of individuals in India learning a foreign language with various degrees of success, like the set of Indians who know some Russian or Japanese?

Such a stand has in fact been taken. Kachru (1983: 142, n. 11) reports that 'H.A. Passé and some other scholars, too, object to the use of the term [Indian English]. According to them, it implies a status for IE which equates it with those varieties of English which are used as L1s (see Passé 1947)'. If we agree with Passé and Mukherjee that there are no autonomous Indian norms of English speech or writing around which an Indian English language network could be said to cluster, then one could argue, couldn't one, that the gap we have noticed does not betoken any crisis stemming from the premises of naturalism as a paradigm, but is to be seen as a mistake on Kachru's part.

However, things are not that simple. Indian English, including the qualitative range from the peaks to the pits, has been stable for a long time, and stability calls for the postulation of an object of description. Thus, Kachru's analysis can easily be defended. And he does defend it against Passé in the same footnote: 'I think the term IE is contextually self-explanatory, and linguistically significant. Furthermore, it makes [it] clear that the English language is used as a non-native language by the users of Indian languages, and more important, that it functions in those contexts which are "non-English" or "non-American".' He draws the distinction Passé is concerned with at a different level: 'IE is used as an L2 in contrast with [Australian English, Canadian English, Scottish English etc.] which are, by and large, used as L1s' (p. 142, n. 12).

Kachru thus finds a valid site for Indian English on what naturalism takes to be the map: he situates the language in an India-based English-L2-speaking community, and then he proceeds to describe the language. This is what a serious naturalist must do to distinguish this case on the one hand from Australian English and on the other hand from the case of Indian learners and users of Russian, who use it not as an L2 but as a Foreign Language (FL), and do not form a community.

That the problem nonetheless seems to persist is due to a malaise within naturalism. Kachru's critics are ill at ease with the notion of an L2-speaking community. In the naturalist idealization, a language can only have native (L1) speakers within the speech community, whose intuitions count, and foreign (FL) speakers outside it, whose impure knowledge is of no account. The concept of an L2 speech community is anomalous in that it violates this idealization which is central to the naturalist perspective. And yet naturalism's descriptive imperative forces a linguist to describe the stability of the English network in India in terms of a stable speech community as its substratum. So Kachru has no choice but to do what he does. The framework could not have given him the option of describing the presence of English in India as a configuration of cultural forces (rather than a natural language community) without ceasing to be naturalism.

As we shall see, this anomalous site that Kachru has found for English in India is the beginning of a wisdom that will answer the question posed in section 3.1. But that comes later. We shall look at his work first.

## 3.4 Kachru's Context

When approaching the work of a socially self-conscious author who goes so far as to note, at the beginning of the introduction to his 1983 book, that 'Since these studies were written over almost two decades in three linguistically and culturally distinct areas (Britain, the U.S. and India), each study has a history of its own and reflects the specific influence and background present at the time of its writing' (1983: 1), it may be useful to consider also what it is now fashionable to call the 'outwork' of his texts—the way he wants the reader to approach him. Readers uninterested in such an exercise may skip this section and move to 3.5.

Kachru's story of influences includes a portrait of J.R. Firth as a guru in whom 'one could see both the sahib and the pandit' (p. 5), an appropriately Indian-sounding characterization of a man who was one of the administrators of the British raj and whose linguistics came out of that colonial experience.

Firth was apparently a pandit in 'his talent for maukhik ("oral") transmission of ideas, the Western tradition being essentially a written one' (p. 5). Kachru used to 'sit in front of him, listening to his monologues (one rarely discussed things with Firth)' (p. 6); it is natural that one should learn uncritically from an oral guru, seeing that it is difficult to respond critically to the fleeting spoken word, especially with a man like Firth who said much more than he wrote, according to the testimony of other pupils and colleagues.

The difficulty of responding critically to such a teacher and of developing a critique of the standpoint of the British raj is compounded when this particular guru turns out to be a person who, 'in his lectures and in his writing, [. . .] developed a mystique' (p. 5). Participants in the mystique, such as Kachru, testify that 'it was therefore a pleasure to watch Firth, the whole man', in a lecture hall or to meet with him for individual consultation' (p. 5).

Firth was thus a personal symbol of the mystique of the British raj, which presented itself as an enterprise undertaken by 'whole men' who were engaged in the civilizing work of teaching, neutrally cutting through the squabbles of scrambling and fragmented native elites and reaching out directly to the hearts and minds of the Indian masses.

Kachru's narrative reinforces the content of this mystique elsewhere by quoting a passage from Raja Rao: 'As long as we are Indian—that is not nationalists, but truly Indians of the Indian psyche—we shall have the English language with us and amongst us, and not as guest or friend, but as one of our own, of our caste, our creed, our sect and of our tradition' (n. 2, quoted from Raja Rao [1978: 420]). The standpoint expressed here identifies with the sahib capable of putting in their place any silly nationalists who think that an emphasis on castes, creeds, sects, and divided traditions can lead to petty chauvinism and separatism. The Raja Rao passage reflects unwavering faith (acalaa bhakti, as we call it in Sanskrit) in the benign arbitration of Western power—in the form of the British Raj or in the later form of a neo-colonial order administered through English—as the only force capable of stemming the chaos that secular nationalism, left to itself, would unleash on India.

The mystique element is reinforced, finally, by Kachru's other major invocation, that of Dustoor (Kachru dedicates the book to 'Phiroze Edulji Dustoor 1898–1979 and John Rupert Firth 1890–1960). Kachru recalls that in the 1950s, Dustoor was one of the few scholars active in the academic world who had developed a linguistically realistic attitude toward the Indian variety of English. Dustoor emphatically claimed that 'there will always be a more or less indigenous flavour about our English. In our imagery, in our choice of words, in the nuances of meaning we put into our words, we must be expected to be different from Englishmen and Americans alike' (reproduced in Dustoor [1968: 126]). He considered the English of Rabindranath Tagore, Sarojini Naidu and Manmohan Ghose 'the better, not the worse, for bearing the stamp of a national temperament'. Dustoor saw ahead:

Our mental climate will always foster plants that do not flourish in England or America; and such plants, just because they are somewhat exotic, add to the charm of a garden. All lovers of English will, therefore, encourage them to grow in the worldwide garden of English. It is only the weeds, which spring up whenever ignorance, carelessness or pretentiousness infects the air, that need to be pulled up by the roots.

In this metaphorical statement Dustoor has made a lucid distinction between 'indigenous flavour' or 'national temperament', between a 'deviation' and a 'mistake', and what may be termed acquisitional deficiency. (pp. 3-4)

Just as Kachru fails to observe that the Raja Rao quote makes English the language of 'our caste', the Brahmins, so also he refrains from noting that Dustoor's 'metaphorical statement' presents Indian English as an exercise in gardening and can only be read as an attempt to persuade the metropolitan taste system which controls the evaluation and therefore the goals of such gardening to stop excluding the Indian-grown varieties of English flowers outright. The gardening metaphor indicates both the role of cultural control in sustaining the purpose-bound presence of English in India and the fact that—unlike agriculture, which too is a non-natural set of events under human control—this is a case of gardening and thus involves much more detailed, aesthetically careful, and delicate labour on the part of the controllers of the process if the limited and beautiful patch of fragile 'life' is to be sustained. If the cultural sun continuing the mystique of the British empire truly sets, such gardens will die; so at least these passages imply. Dustoor's decision to mention 'America' after 'England'—designations which worry sensitive Scottish, Welsh, Irish, Canadian readers, who tend to prefer the designations 'United States' and 'Britain'—coupled with his omission of Canada, Australia, New Zealand, etc., indicates clearly that he sees the U.S. as participating in the metropolitan control system, inheriting the British mantle, and that he is addressing this system, not reaching out to all native speakers of English for fraternal support. He knows that in the real world it is not critics based in Australia or Canada who will make a difference to Indian practice. And his is certainly not a Third World solidarity message inviting fellow non-native speakers to participate in the construction of a new international aesthetic order that would begin to marginalize the hitherto dominant metropolitan control of taste. Did Kachru not tell us that Dustoor 'had developed a linguistically realistic attitude'? Realism meant knowing that Nehruvian India's Third-Worldism was a piece of show biz, not to be seriously pursued in forming one's opinions or in moulding those of students like Kachru.

Coming as he did from such a background, what a long way Kachru had to travel to even begin to develop an account of Indian English free from the overt acceptance of colonial control! His achievements in the implementation of Dustoor's post-colonial programme, of getting the sahibs to agree that the varieties of English used in the ex-colonies should count as varieties of English (though admittedly marginal, 'non-native' varieties) subject to the normal laws of naturalist linguistic description, have to be seen to be believed. It is difficult for those of us who belong to later generations to appreciate how hard the Lals and the Kachrus of the world had to try in order to make even naturalism, the ideology derived from the early-modernist period in literature and the early-structuralist period in linguistics, generally acceptable in a period as late as the 1960s. Academics are as slow to learn as sesquagenarian high court judges.

## 3.5 Kachru's Contextualization

Kachru says his analytical 'aim is to capture the processes and devices of the Indianness of this nativized variety of English which has been used by Indians to serve the typically Indian needs in distinct Indian contexts for almost two hundred years' (p. 2). His central point is that 'The Indianisms in Indian English [. . .] are indeed culture-bound and language-bound. For the lack of a better term, I call such Indianisms deviations [. . .]. Indianisms in Indian English are, then, linguistic manifestations of pragmatic needs for appropriate language use in a new linguistic and cultural context. [. . .] The term "deviation" serves a useful purpose when it refers to the linguistic and cultural nativism of a variety of English. Nativism is the result of the new "unEnglish" linguistic and cultural setting in which English is used as a tool of communication. [...] On the other hand, a "mistake" is unacceptable on several counts. This term may be restricted to those uses of English which show early stages in language acquisition. One might outright reject some uses of language as unacceptable since they are "unEnglish". The term "unEnglish" is rather tricky. One way to explain the "unEnglishness" of a "mistake" is to say that in systemic terms it is not a result of the productive processes which characterize a particular non-native variety of English. One might also state that in sociologic terms a "mistake" is not functionally related to the cultural context of a non-native variety. But then dichotomies are not always clearcut and do not work in a neat way, and some gray areas cannot clearly be categorized: for example, how does one treat the Indian use of the English article? Or, what should one's reaction be to the Indian use of plural forms such as "alphabets" or "furnitures"? One has to be aware of such problems' (pp. 2-3). In other words, there are two ways for Indian usages in English to count as 'unEnglish': we may deviate or we may err. When we deviate, we are unEnglish at a 'systemic' level, which makes it acceptable within our system. When we err, we are unEnglish in an 'unproductive' direction, and even the Indian English system does not sanction such usages, but treats them as mistakes. And whenever you put 'the system' to a test, whenever you pick a case where you personally don't feel sure whether to regard the case as an error or as a deviation, you ask the system and are told that 'some gray areas cannot clearly be categorized', in other words, the system has no answer if you don't.

The problem is not that Kachru does not give us a water-tight dichotomy between mistakes and deviations—it would perhaps be unfair to demand such a thing. The deeper problem is that his notion of contextualization does not have a clue as to what type or level of influence from the Indian context shows up in mistakes and what influence gives rise to deviations of a productive sort. Kachru finds no basis for the mistake/deviation distinction, no correlate, no cause, no concomitant. All he offers is the observation that there are clear cases of mistakes and clear cases of productive or systemic deviations, and a catalogue of facts organized around this observation. Since neither he nor his literary critics like Meenakshi Mukherjee have anything better to offer, we will continue to cherish and enrich his catalogue of facts and hope to have a principled account of the facts some day; but it is important to begin with the realization that it is such a catalogue that we are dealing with. The socio-linguistics which Kachru represents, and represents well, belongs to the taxonomic period of the history of linguistics. Naturalism is simply our name here, useful for emphasizing some features of it, for that period.

Contextualization serves, then, to relate the mistakes and deviations to their 'Indian context'. We may best understand contextualization as a method of associating items in the language catalogue of mistakes and deviations with items in the culture catalogue of the wonder that is India. Such a list of possible connections should be useful in any research that seeks to explain Indian English in terms of Indian culture. Explanatory research efforts are likely to meet with some success when scholars try to move away from the naturalist taxonomy of facts and wonders towards a well-founded linguistics of Indian English, a well-founded account of its linguistic and cultural context, and a set of independently motivated principles linking the two. In this book we plead for the pursuit of such a goal on the basis of, among other things, the data gathered by Kachru, including the largely lexical data he has packaged in terms of 'contextualization'.

Let us illustrate his method:

Those Indianisms which have specific meaning (and function) in Indian culture may be termed contextually determined (or contextually loaded) Indianisms. [. . .]

Contextually determined Indianisms involve the transfer of meaning from the native culture of IE writers, in addition to the transfer of collocations from Indian languages: e.g., use of flower-bed (MM 90) in the sense of nuptial-bed which has already been mentioned. (Kachru 1983: 137-38)

Note 29 does the actual work of contextualizing:

In terms of the structure, it is a rank-bound and item-bound transfer. It is rank-bound in the sense that structurally in Bengali and English it belongs to the same unit ('word', compound) and item-bound in the sense that phuul has been equated with flower and shojja with bed. The collocation has been used in the same contextual unit in which phuul shojja operates in Bengali culture. As mentioned earlier, in this case, the register-confusion could be avoided by the use of an item like nuptial bed. (p. 143)

The gentle advice to authors like B. Bhattacharya (whose novel Music for Mohini is cited as the source of flower-bed) about the possibility of avoiding register-confusion suggests that Kachru may feel that flower-bed is a mistake and not a deviation. But it is hard to be sure. If it is not a deviation, his doing the contextualization exercise for it makes no sense in the framework he proposes. But if it is not a mistake, one wonders why he labels it as a register-confusion and suggests that it was avoidable. Could it be that the actual application of the mistake-deviation distinction in descriptive work is less important to Kachru than making the point that the distinction exists in principle?

The errors in Kachru's presentation of the Bangla facts are of some interest because they cannot be attributed to poor printing, reappearing as they do on p. 131 where the same point is made. Kachru incorrectly shows length on the vowel (he uses a macron; we substitute a colon for expository clarity) in the Bangla word for 'flower' and on the final vowel of the word for 'bed', when in fact Bangla has no long vowels, and shows the first vowel of the word for 'bed' as a low O (Kachru uses the IPA symbol—the use of capital O and E for low vowels is in accord with the transcription conventions I normally follow) when in fact it should be a mid o. See the discussion of note 41, below, for further evidence of Kachru's cavalier attitude towards the phonology of Indian languages, and the discussion of the content of note 41 for evidence that it is not just a matter of phonology. We return to the import of these problems, setting them aside for the moment as mere matters of execution unrelated to the valid leading idea of the analysis.

After the introductory discussion of flower-bed Kachru proceeds to give 'a short list of such (non-hybrid) Indianisms' which 'have been abstracted, among others, from the following contexts: material objects, flora-fauna, socio-religious and political systems, relationships of castes and social hierarchy, speech-functions, social roles' (p. 138). I reproduce part of the 'short' list and the associated notes; readers may consult the original for information about the sources and the other items and notes:

alms-bowl, ankle-bells, anklet-bells, ash-marks, bamboo-stretcher, bangle-man, bangle-seller, bangled-widow, bath-fire, bath-milk, bedding-rolls, betel-bag, betel-woman, black-money, blessing-ceremony, bridal-bath, bride-showing, bullock-proof, burning-ground, car-festival, cart-man, cook-woman, cow-dung cakes, cow-worship, cousin-sister, cousin-brother, dining-leaf, dung-basket, dung-washed, eating-leaves, flower-bed, forbidden-meat, forehead-marking, invitation-rice, leaf-bag, leaf-plate, leaf-pot, marriage-drums, marriage-festival, marriage-month, marriage-season, milk-bath, nine-stranded-thread, [. . .] (p. 138)

31. Reference to the caste-symbol on one's forehead, cf. 'A fine thing too, it is, you with your broad ash-mark and your queer son and his ways.'

32. Showing social attitude towards a widow in Hindu society, cf. 'What, to that bangled widow? She will lead us all to prostitution.' (A Hindu widow is not supposed to wear any ornaments.)

33. Restricted to ceremonies in Hindu temples.

34. On the analogy of black-market, cf. . . . 'and he had more than a hundred thousand rupees of black money in the locker.'

35. A special ritual performed in the Hindu wedding ceremony.

36. Used in the sense of 'cremation-ground'.

37. Reference to the famous Hindu festival in Puri, Orissa.

38. 'On this, her flower-bed, her seven children were born.' (from the forbidden meat.)

40. Restricted to the religious register. 'I will make a milk-bath offering to the deity.'

41. Reference to the holy thread (janeo) worn by Hindus. 'The white ...nine-stranded thread shall gleam across yo[u]'

It is interesting to watch the contextualization exercise, which is carried out entirely in the notes at the end of the chapter. Notice how skimpy the information is. Note 31 does not say what caste may bear the symbol. Note 37 leaves it up to the reader to guess whether the car involved is a modern automobile, or some vehicle type unfamiliar to Europeans, or a variable entity. (Recall that the book addresses a world audience.) Note 39 gives no information about what kind of meat an Indian reader may infer the 'forbidden meat' to be.

The problem is perhaps especially acute in note 41, the only note in the whole series where a fragment of an Indian language is cited. Kachru phonologically misrepresents the word—the last vowel is given as an o, but it should be a long uu. He fails to tell us what language the word is from; it is in fact a Hindi word. He does not explain why, in connection with a datum like nine-stranded thread which he cites from 'HW 45' (p. 138), which means R. Bhattacharya's novel He Who Rides a Tiger, he is giving us the Hindi form rather than the Bangla form poita, that being presumably the original that Bhattacharya is transferring from.

These critical observations are not intended as quibbles. The fact that the level of care on the phonological and cultural planes is merely the lower-middle level one would expect in casual glosses appended to a translated novel, glosses intended to satisfy a fiction reader's lay curiosity, shows that Kachru's contextualizations do not, because they cannot, instantiate the workings of a serious socio-linguistic analysis whose details would address a specialized and rigorous audience. We are not looking here at mere failures of implementation irrelevant to the intrinsically acceptable programme Kachru had set out to implement. Rather, we are looking at omissions and inaccuracies which reflect the fact that precision and rigour were unavailable to him in principle. His very programme handicapped him. The item-to-item mini-stories he set out to tell could not have been narrated more satisfactorily on any systematic basis, for there was no thread that could have linked them to any system and given his overall description more firmness.

Notice that such lexicographic and semi-encyclopaedic notes, coupled with the map drawn by listing the domains as 'material objects, flora-fauna, socio-religious and political systems, relationships of the castes and social hierarchy, speech-functions, social roles' (p. 138), are not incidental points, but constitute the heart of Kachru's analysis of the Indian determinants of Indian English. Kachru believes that contextualization can account for the Indian-ness of Indian English (phonology apart), that the exercise he offers under the name of contextualization can handle those systematic respects in which Indian English in its standard form differs from native, metropolitan Englishes.

## 3.6 Towards Descriptive Adequacy

Kachru's perspective deals with 'the Englishes', the varieties of English in the world. His strategy is to identify and list the features of Indian English that are absent in the standard-setting metropolitan Englishes. He then annotates each item on the list in terms of possibly relevant facts about the Indian environment in which the item originates and functions. It is unlikely that even the most scrupulous practitioner of this method who checks all the details of phonology and caste can get more adequate results than Kachru has.

If we wish to try for a more adequate description, we will have to treat the comparison of Indian English with other Englishes as just a limited heuristic exercise enabling us to identify roughly the site where our comparative teams should do the digging, not a serious procedure for finding answers or delimiting phenomena. The real work will involve using relatively substantive or serious characterizations of Indian cultures and languages on the one hand and of English on the other. The main problem with Kachru's account, as most readers must have noticed by now, is the fact that it is not grounded in any systematic characterization, but proceeds anecdotally from item to item.

We are proposing, then, that the study of Indian English be seen as dependent on the serious study of the cultures and languages of India. This methodological postulate follows from our empirical hypothesis, elaborated in sections 3.8 and 3.9, that English in India is a heteronomous language. Its presence is purpose-bound; the purposes it serves in India become intelligible only when we come to understand how the communities in this country pursue their goals and use English as a tool in such pursuit.

The alternative method which Kachru has followed inevitably plays up the exotic local colour of Indian English as seen from the point of view of a metropolitan speaker of English who knows very little about India and has a tourist's attitude to the details of an unfamiliar culture. If one regards as crucial the comparison of Indian English with other Englishes, the local colour becomes one's principal object of study, and the result of one's analysis can only be an annotated collection of trivia. If one decides, instead, to attach more importance to the functioning of Indian English within the linguistic and cultural space of India, then the main point of reference will be the Indian systems in the light of which facts of Indian English have to be described and interpreted. The examples which then become important are not the exotic trivia of interest to the American or Australian tourist, but core facts about the language.

While contextualization compels Kachru to focus on local colour, it is not as if he fails to notice core facts. He records the use of the progressive forms of know, see, hear, for instance, as an Indianism. But this is how he puts it: 'A large number of Indianisms may be so termed because of category change or category extension. Consider, for example, the sub-set of verbs with be + ing in English. The members of this sub-set do not coincide with those in the native varieties of English; for example, hearing, seeing, knowing. On the other hand, in Indian English we have I am hearing, I am seeing, you must be knowing.' (p. 178). Here his discussion of the matter ends. Nothing is said about what may be responsible for this particular 'category extension'. At least for see and hear, surely the fact that Indian languages tend to have only one lexeme in each case corresponding to the pairs see/look and hear/listen in metropolitan English (the Hindi lexemes being dekhna and sunna respectively) is of some relevance. So is the relative rarity of listen and look in the speech of average users of Indian English, who tend to say "See this news!" in situations where more careful speakers would prefer "Look at this news item!" The neatness of this paradigm is not matched in the case of Indian English know/come to know or Hindi jana/maalum hona/pata chalna. This would lead one to expect that I am knowing should be less frequent and should sound less natural than I am seeing and I am hearing, which does seem to be the case. The form Kachru cites, You must be knowing, may reflect Hindi forms like aap to zaruur jaante honge coupled with the absence of aware as an active lexical item for the average speaker of Indian English (though it is readily available in the normal passive vocabulary).

If we carry out the equivalent of this exercise for Indian languages other than Hindi, the pattern changes in interesting ways; so do the facts of the relevant variety of Indian English. In Bangla, for instance, dekha and Sona as bare stems correspond more closely to the senses 'look' and 'listen', and there is a productive pattern yielding dekhte pawa and sunte pawa for 'see' and 'hear' (the constituents literally mean something like 'to get to look/see' and 'to get to listen/hear'). One consequence is that Bangla-speaking users of Indian English tend to extend I can see and I can hear to situations where the norm Kachru is more accustomed to would have I am seeing and I am hearing, although the Bangla-based variety also—like the norm described by Kachru—lacks look and listen (as readily available elements in the active vocabulary of the average speaker—a qualification we must bear in mind throughout such discussions). Bangla has nothing quite like aap to jaante honge, and the variety of Indian English it nourishes correspondingly lacks the You must be knowing option.

To continue our exploration of core observations Kachru makes but gives little space to, right after the point about hear-see-know Kachru adds that 'There is also a tendency towards deletion of the reflexive pronouns with reflexive verbs (e.g., enjoy, exert; see Kindersley, 1938). In Kindersley (1938) there is an interesting list of items which display category change, in the sense that intransitive verbs are used as transitive verbs or vice versa' (p. 138).

These topics are more important than the brevity of their treatment in Kachru would make them appear. Let us first look at the alleged 'deletion of reflexive pronouns with reflexive verbs' in the cases of 'enjoy, exert'.

What Kachru seems to mean is that Indians tend to say "You did not enjoy" or "I have to exert" where native speakers of metropolitan Englishes would have said "You did not enjoy yourself" or "I have to exert myself." His label for the fact indicates that he thinks Indian speakers of English have metropolitan deep structures and Third World surface structures derived by deletion and other transformational processes. The methodological questions that arise from this curious view will be discussed later in connection with another example. For the moment, we may simply note that this is what he has in mind.

One can understand that a 1938 author like Kindersley, writing before Tesnière and Chomsky turned syntactic study into a serious modern enterprise in the fifties, may want to list some isolated differences between Indian and British English, and may do so from the British point of view. In our syntactic day and age, however, it is natural to ask for descriptions rather than observations. Descriptively, it would appear that 'deletion of reflexive pronouns with reflexive verbs' can be a coherent notion only in a language where a 'reflexive verb', i.e., a verb lexeme coupled with a reflexive NP to which it does not assign a regular theta-role (in the standard parlance of the parametric theory of syntax initiated by Chomsky 1981), can exist at the D-structure level of representation. But it is not clear that Indian English, or any other Indian language, has this property. Thus, a rather different description of the facts seems to be called for.

The reflexive verb reading of hurt oneself, for instance, is not readily available in Indian English. Indian English allows us to say "Hitesh hurt himself on purpose so that he would not have to go." But there is no reflexive verb here: hurt assigns a regular theta-role to its object himself, and the sentence cannot be paraphrased by saying that Hitesh got hurt. When we see someone suffering an injury, we express our concern in India by asking "Did you get hurt?" not "Did you hurt yourself?", although our normal degree of passive command over metropolitan English guarantees that we do understand the latter form if someone uses it.

There are good reasons for the absence of reflexive verbs, in this sense, in Indian English. India's indigenous languages do not have combinations consisting of a verb plus a reflexive NP without a regular theta role. Instead, one might say, they have main verb stem plus verbal functor combinations, where the functor may be a vector verb such as Hindi lena or a special affix like the reflexivizer koL found in several Dravidian languages like Tamil and Kannada. However, I have not found any evidence that such autophoric verbs, as one might call them, genuinely correspond to the reflexive verbs of languages like English: there are significant differences of semantics and lexical incidence. A more promising line of thought, it seems to me, is to relate the absence of reflexive verbs in Indian languages, including Indian English, to the absence of combinations of verb plus pronominal NP without regular theta-role. Such combinations abound in metropolitan English: "Are we going to make it to the party?" "Move it!", "Wing it!", "Beat it!", and so on. The generalization seems to be that verbs in India never assign the idiomatic quasi-theta-role to pronominal or anaphoric NPs at D-structure, so that a whole class of idioms is unavailable. 'Deletion' has nothing to do with the phenomenon.

If we dig a little deeper—a task facilitated by Kachru's other anecdotal observations—we may be able to relate this descriptive generalization to an explanatory hypothesis couched at the level at which parametric syntax locates fundamental typological differences between languages. With that goal in mind, we turn to the next observation Kachru picks up from Kindersley, about 'intransitive verbs [. . .] used as transitive verbs and vice versa'.

A rather important phenomenon which the framework seems to force Kachru (we say 'seems to' as he gives no examples of the traffic back and forth between transitive and intransitive) to subsume under this 'vice versa' is the systematic omissibility of contextually identifiable direct objects. This feature, shared by Indian English with India's native tongues, may be observed in an exchange like "Did you take the bag?—Yes, I took", where took has no overt object and is assumed by parametric syntacticians to have a phonologically null object with certain significant properties, often called a Null Object tout court.

The current round of studies on null objects—initiated by Huang (1984), made more systematic by Cole (1987), brought to bear on an Indo-Aryan language by Wurff (1989), and extended to many other languages in a literature too vast to survey here—has shown clearly that the null object effect represents some complex interplay between the anaphoric and pronominal systems of a language and its treatment of the Complementizer and Topic (or 'Specifier of Comp-prime') position in the clause.

Now, we have already seen that Indian English D-structures do not license idiomatic anaphors (reflexives) and pronominals of a sort that the metropolitan Englishes are fond of. Indian English also displays other Indian-derived specificities in its pronominal system permitting backward pronominal co-reference only marginally and deictic use of it fairly freely: "Give it (pointing at it) to the servant", where a metropolitan speaker would have preferred "Give this to the servant." In its handling of the Comp system, Indian English is noticeably unEnglish, to use Kachru's ambiguous term. "Why you are sitting here?" and the like constitute a robust and pervasive pattern and show that movement from Infl to Comp in a root sentence (a standard feature of the metropolitan Englishes) is absent, while the less pervasive but frequent and robust indirect constituent question pattern observed in "I want to know that how many biryanis he has ordered" shows that wh-fronting in Indian English adjoins the phrase to IP, the maximal projection of Infl(ection), instead of moving it into the Specifier of Comp-prime. Thus, the coreferential system as well as the Comp area of the Indian English clause differs markedly from metropolitan Englishes, and does so in a visibly Indian direction. For Indian languages in general exclude idiomatic (not-regularly-theta-marked) anaphors and pronominals, allow backward pronominalization only marginally and the deictic use of the third person pronouns with inanimate reference quite freely, exclude the syntactic movement of Infl to Comp in indicative clauses, and restrict all topicalization to the IP boundary landing site (permitting only abstract movement to the Specifier of Comp-prime). Therefore, we may reasonably hope that syntactic research in the near future will be able to explain the null object effect in terms of the simpler phenomena whose interplay it reflects, in Indian English as well as other 'exotic' languages—exotic (unlike metropolitan Englishes) in that they exhibit these particular phenomena as well as the null object effect.

It is the systematic study of these exotic languages, including those of India, that will feed that hope—not the study of metropolitan English, which fails to exhibit the phenomena in question and cannot contribute directly to their analysis.

Finally to make a methodological point, we turn to one more observation of Kachru's; this time we will not propose a descriptively adequate restatement (see Dasgupta 1986: 80-83 for such a proposal, which still seems to us basically sound):

Deletion in Indian English collocations. It is interesting to note that there is on the whole an underlying regular syntactic process involved in forming IE collocations. [. . .] Note, for example, many nominal formations of modifier + head + qualifier structure are reduced in IE to formations of modifier + noun structure.

In many such Indianisms the rank reduction involves first the process of deletion and then permutation of the lexical items.

Consider, for instance, the following nominal groups of English:

(1) an address of welcome. (2) a bunch of keys, and (3) love of God. In IE these are reduced to: (1) welcome address (IE [Indian Express] 14 August 1959), (2) key bunch (AD [The Astrologer's Day and Other Stories, by R.K. Narayan] p. 178), and (3) God-love (U [Untouchable, by Mulk Raj Anand] p. 205).

In formations such as America-returned (FF [The Flame of the Forest, by S.N. Ghosh] p. 105) or England-returned, the process involved is more complex. Though the process is complex the underlying structures are nondeviant, but the realized structures (e.g., America-returned or England-returned) are deviant and would need both semantic and grammatical explanations in the Indian variety of English. (p. 136)

Here, as in the case of alleged deletion of reflexives, we find Kachru proposing that Indians store non-deviant metropolitan English underlying structures which, when speaking or writing, they transform into deviant or unEnglish realized structures. This curious application of transformational grammar stems, no doubt, from Kachru's methodological strategy of using only metropolitan English as a systematic point of comparison and reference. As we have seen, a methodology which, while retaining metropolitan English norms as an initial point of comparison for heuristic purposes, depends crucially on the subsequent comparison with Indian linguistic systems for the delimitation and investigation of one's explananda leads in practice to descriptively adequate results. The moral of this exercise should be clear.

Considerations of space prevent us from developing and using systematic descriptions of Indian cultural facts here, or pointing out and analyzing significant lexical and grammatical phenomena of Indian English that are not reported by Kachru but will need to be taken into account in more ambitious characterizations of the language. Readers interested should consult Dasgupta (1986: 74-83).

## 3.7 Naturalism and Its Discontents

[Section heading appears to have OCR corruption in the original; content follows]

The recruitment patterns of the Indian academic and literary scene, and the theoretical context which these create around figures like P. Lal and the Kachrus, demonstrate that their practice is guided by a broader consensus. This consensus reflects a massively shared belief among linguistic and literary practitioners among young Indian scholars. Their practice shows, further, that they agree also that the massive Indian effort to use English effectively, and to get more and more young Indians into this magic circle, is to be accomplished by focus on the phenomena of the target, which is English and the rules of English. One may afford to glance occasionally at Indian phenomena, but only to the extent that the documents one refers to are deviant English. Even deviant English may be touched on to a point or two, but only with kid gloves. It is out of the question to take up Indian phenomena in themselves in order to understand their bearing on any realities or possibilities of Indian English. The recruitment patterns of the Indian academic and literary worlds, with the resulting theoretical context that clung to figures like Lal and Kachrus, are what we meant in our preceding sections when we spoke of the persistence of naturalism. The theoretical world which both the linguist and the literary scholar inhabit is not one that is informed by any integration with the real-world theoretical context as seen in the light of modernism and its existentialist and structuralist follow-throughs. As all practising linguistic and literary scholars in India know, what we have instead is a situation of abysmal intellectual poverty in the key domains just mentioned.

Our diagnosis is that the intellectual sterility of the project reflects the cultural sterility of Indian English described in section 3.1. Both sterilities are due to the same root cause: naturalism has compelled our best minds in this project to feel caught between the natural compulsions of the English-defined form of the project and the natural impulsions of the India-derived substance engaged in the (imaginative) representation of English, for that job belongs to the sahibs, or a representation of Indian realities, for that job was supposed to be left to the mere natives, whose self-representational work is in the irrelevant Indian languages and therefore should not burden our English ones. The result is literary types without a legitimate natural domain to try their naturalism on. They not only lack a community; their intellectual effort lacks an object of description, and thus can only produce vacuous and foundationless results. Hence the non-performance that the record shows.

In the light of this diagnosis, it is now possible to make sense of the apparently distinct stands the naturalist linguists and literary critics have taken on Indian English and the empirically seamless consensus that marks their practice.

The function of the naturalism of the authors we are discussing is to recirculate what, in the undisguised enterprise which is known as English and which in real life is controlled form of discourse suitable for the period of neo-colonial, formally post-colonial control. The overt prescriptivism reflective of the formally colonial past has to be dropped, and this dropping brings in its wake a new descriptive politeness, also seen in the use of euphemisms like 'developing nations' for the poor countries. Now, this politeness compels the English language teaching enterprise, and the sectors of linguistics which serve it, to reclassify the mistakes made by, say, Indian learners of English—which would have been and were called mistakes in the formally colonial period—as specific features of the variety of English spoken by these individuals at a certain stage of development. It is simplest, academically, to frame this exercise in the context of a socio-linguistics of new varieties of English—Indian English, Nigerian English, Tanzanian English—corresponding to the domains over which formally separate English teaching systems exercise their supervisory control. Thus, what could have been described earlier as typical mistakes made by learners from region X and typical methods to be used by teachers to overcome the problems are now to be described, diplomatically, as typical features distinguishing the X variety of English from the metropolitan Englishes, and typical procedures to bring about, if desired by the learner, a reduction of the distance between the sub-variety of X-English he or she speaks and the highest (most metropolis-like) point on the X-English 'cline of bilingualism' (a term from Kachru [1983]). Hence the need for our linguists to speak of an Indian English, and to put the whole story in the framework of the community that uses various sub-varieties of the Indian variety of English, some of them more and some of them less similar to metropolitan norms. In contrast, the rules of politeness work differently in the domain of Third World participation in the English literary enterprise. Unlike the teaching of the English language, which produces English-acquainted workers for the domestic workforce of each Third World nation, the cultivation of English literature in the sense of the production of publishable pieces of creative writing is an enterprise geared to the world market of English magazines and books. The consumers in the book market are located mainly in the metropolitan English-speaking countries. This fact, even where those particular consumers do not individually play a role, shapes the overall contours of the publishing industry for creative literature in English, and the ancillary system of criticism and so forth devoted to evaluating particular items from the point of view of this market.

One is not necessarily bound by the crass rules of the pulp section of the market, of course. Snooty critics have the function of sorting out what belongs and what fails to belong to the elite sub-market. However, the point is that, regardless of the section of the market that one is concerned with, the rules are not of the kind that would encourage much politeness towards the masses. Indian writing in English has to compete, on the world English literature market, with all other writing in English. While tourist appeal and exoticism are market factors too, they do not take the budding writer very far. It is thus in the best interest of an Indian writer who wishes to make progress to adopt the persona of just another writer in this particular language, not necessarily tied down to the country, India, from which the writing originates.

Weeding out the unsuccessful is done by the market—and by the market adjuncts such as criticism in the press—in what is regarded as the natural way. It is thus unnecessary for the theory of Indian writing in English, or for the Lals or Mukherjees who explicate the theory for us, to be kind to mistakes and to those who perpetrate them. That knocks out the language teaching type of reason for believing in an Indian English with a generous 'cline of bilingualism' ranging from the best to the worst but holding out to the latter the hope of moving up the cline.

Different individuals in India hoping to make it on the English book market of the world are competing separately and equally. To the extent that it becomes an advantage for them to club together, you will get a Writers' Workshop. But it has in fact not turned out to be an advantage to try to construct a real or notional community of all Indians who do or may aspire to become great writers in English; that is not how these models of competition work. This fact knocks out another potential reason for P. Lal or Meenakshi Mukherjee to 'postulate Indian English'.

Understanding reality has never been the goal of the Indian practitioners of either the literary or the linguistic wing of the English enterprise; they were fighting to win—to teach English successfully, or to win recognition in literature. Hence the absence of serious analysis, one might say. But it is clear that everybody did have an eye on success. And it has long been known that a successful literary movement or language-related awakening is supposed to produce new theorizing about language and literature. Thus, even for the sake of tokenism, one would have expected at least a semblance of new thinking to appear, and at least official grammars and metacritical theories to be produced. That even this has not happened, and that the rhetorical stances taken by the top theoreticians have amounted to a lukewarm Mukherjee/Kachru debate over the very existence of Indian English as a language possessing a speech community, shows clearly how little energy Indian English has had in its sails, or what a tepid level of creativity has been powering its engines.

In the next section we shall argue that the engine metaphor is more appropriate than the sail image, and that that is part of the answer to the question of why Indian English has been a culturally and intellectually sterile project.

## 3.8 Technical Appropriation

It may be helpful to make some organizational remarks about the rest of the book at this point, for this is the pivot of the book. We have just finished asking the main question: how come we seem to be investing so much energy in our English project and getting such poor returns, in contrast to our earlier Sanskrit project where we did so well? The second half of the book will elaborate our answer to this.

Section 3.8 suggests that we have appropriated English as a technical system and that if we read our English project in this way we shall see that in fact the project, properly construed, is doing quite well; its cultural and self-cognitive sterility is fine, just as the sterility of an injection syringe is fine. Chapter 4 elaborates this proposal, in terms of a normative notion of rationality appropriate to the H domain of a culture.

Section 3.9 adds that the 'we' who have taken up this project are an India which, unlike that of the Gupta period, has shifted its cultural centre of gravity from the H to the L discourse. This shift and the rationality corresponding to it are discussed in chapter 5.

Chapters 4 and 5, thus adumbrated in these last sections of chapter 3, will come together in chapter 6, where it is explained that the L rationality of chapter 5 employs the H rationality of chapter 4 as an adjunct and keeps it at a stable distance from the L centre of gravity of the culture. There we end the book.

We now begin the work of this section, by suggesting that the right question to work on is 'Which English is present in India?', a variant of the question 'Which England came to India?' asked by Nehru in his The Discovery of India. The (not very numerous) readers of Nehru will recall his answer, which had been that it was the archaic, illiberal, reactionary side of England that had wielded power over India, while the pro-empire argument had been saying that British rule of India was a test case of the liberal humanist expansion of the enlightenment to the benighted parts of the world. Nehru's naturalism, like that of Pramatha Chaudhuri discussed in chapter 2, took the archaic as its principal adversary. Accordingly, the India built under the hegemony of the naturalism he represented made a transition from the traditional identification with the English of England to what was seen as a modern practice of the self-conscious, purpose-bound use of English as a 'window to the world' (Nehru's words, in this case a long-familiar cliché in our country's discourse on link languages).

This transition inevitably put us in touch with the United States, not in the sense that we switched over to learning American English in terms of phonology and lexis (our slow-moving social process had never permitted us to keep updating our imitations of England in any case—thus, there has long been an average educated Indian English surface that resists massive change at that superficial level), but at the deeper institutional level which one observes in the familiar modelling relation between our Constitution and the American Constitution, or in the affinity between the socio-economic plans that controlled our post-independence development and the theories of modernization that the American academic and administrative establishment had been offering ever since the New Deal. The children of the Indian elite thus began to go to the U.S. rather than Britain for their higher education from the fifties onwards, a shift which has had far-reaching social consequences, including the as yet uncharted linguistic impact of the American use of English on what we are calling India's English project. What is immediately important for our concerns here is the fact that:

America's self-consciously pragmatic and instrumentalist social ideology was able to have a strong impact on our scene because it was consonant with the naturalistic, technical, anti-traditional paradigm running Nehru's development machine, which encompassed all the little naturalisms (from the legacy of the Pramatha Chaudhuris to the new articulations by the P. Lals and the Braj Kachrus) in the sector of language.

To understand this transition fully is a gigantic task, only some aspects of which can be even mentioned here. Chapter 4 will begin to examine the problem of planning, a normative macro-social exercise in the context of which the relevant notions become intelligible. However, the deeper category of the technical, pre-supposed by the concepts of planning and the macro level, seems to be in some sort of direct correspondence with the global functions of English in the twentieth century, a matter which we need to look at immediately. Another prefatory consideration of this sort is the suggestion by Kaviraj (1990) that throughout the 1940s, the Congress Working Committee meetings that dealt with planning and nation-building carried out a spectacular and unargued transition from the politics based on Hindi, the language of the mobilized masses, to a new politics of harnessing technical expertise to get the plans properly formulated and implemented, requiring a complete switch-over in the work of the Congress Party from Hindi to English, to the language of what would have to be the techno-bureaucratic machine enabling the party to rule an independent and industrializing India.

Between these two prefatory considerations—the one pertaining to the fact that technicality in our century speaks English globally and the one that has to do with Kaviraj's hypothesis regarding the transition from mobilization to planning—lies a third, which relates to the technical character of the Nehruvian conception of planning. The technocentric conception of planning reflected a massive consensus: even in counterfactual scenarios for the 1940s involving a figure like Subhash Chandra Bose or M.N. Roy capturing power, one cannot imagine any other type of planning being taken seriously. All the leading lights of modern India, with the ineffectual exception of Gandhi, had been proposing models of development that involved a sell-out to the new scientific mandarins, from whose expert theorizing the right practical guidelines were expected to flow.

Note that this Indian consensus—made inevitable by the traumatic inter-communal clashes whose divisive legacy the leaders and intellectuals felt could be overcome only through a resolutely secular, neutral, technical approach to problems and solutions—was in keeping with the specifically behaviouristic and Parsonian approaches to modernization that coloured most metropolitan academic and serious thinking at the time, including the left wing. In the 1940s there was as yet no Asian Drama (Gunnar Myrdal 1968), no Philosophical Investigations (Ludwig Wittgenstein 1953), no Idea of a Social Science (Peter Winch 1958), to undermine the pre-relativist self-confidence of the Enlightenment project of Western scientific rationality and its institutional adjuncts; this faith was strongly held, even or especially by those who proposed to nationalize and decolonize the implementation of that Enlightenment.

The ambience of the forties made it natural, then, for planning-minded Indians to adopt a positivistic and technical approach to planning. Once the undivided Indian project of attaining idealized 'freedom' and the partition of that India into distinct national units of freedom had been accomplished, the new and reduced India had to redeploy what was left of its energies. Its new project was the material exercise of this freedom for development.

Unlike Pakistan, India decided to be secular and sought to overcome the blatantly archaic and violence-prone patrimonial style of what had been its cultural legacy. Thus, India went naturalist in a big way. Pramatha Chaudhuri's Green Leaf ripened to yield Nehru's solid dam, the new temple for a modern India. It was thus natural to build many features of the United States, the by then established temple of modern technology, into the constitutional and practical-ideological foundations of the nascent Indian republic. That the USSR also shared the American worship of science and technology (in contrast to the British or mainland-European old world unwillingness to trust completely those projections and proposals of scientists with which the empirical horse-sense of the public often does not concur) certainly reinforced the Indian decision to pursue this path. And the global technological hegemony of the English language as modified by the increasingly US-based system of science, industry, and management ensured that the language of India's venture would be an English oriented to the American techno-industrial complex.

The presence of English in India, to answer the question with which this section began, is then a case of Third World needs dictating the use of Appropriate Technology, one of the holy phrases of our times. Chapter 4 will discuss this particular piece of technology and its American cultural background in some detail. What we have to do now is ask, now that we know which English functions (rather than lives) in India: which India uses this English? Section 3.9 and chapter 5 will try to answer this question.

## 3.9 An Area of Listening

The answer we offer is that the India which uses an H English as its technological medium is the current incarnation of what V.S. Naipaul has accurately called an area of darkness. This India, with its heart centred in its L discourse, resists the H Enlightenment by enthroning it, listening to its commands, and diffusing the loud light from its palace into the darkness of a listening which, by neither confronting it nor helping it to expand, frustrates its totalizing project.

The story of this Indian resistance to Western cultural conquest has been conceptualized most effectively, perhaps, by Ashis Nandy in The Intimate Enemy (1983): he presents the struggle as Myth resisting History successfully, and it is the Vidyasagar and the Gandhi instantiating his story who belong to the background assumed in our account—rather than the Vidyasagar and Gandhi figures constructed in the Marxist narratives by Sen (1977) and Chatterjee (1986) respectively, although these are valuable accounts in other respects.

What perhaps remains implicit in Nandy's way of telling the story, and may need to be opened up for discussion, is the fact that myth is a form of rationality which is in dialogue with and critically learns from the H or Enlightenment form of rationality. The resistance and the learning are both part of the dialogue.

That learning must take the form of listening, prototypically, rather than reading, is a very ancient and consensual insight in India. 'Aatmaa vaa are drashtavyah, srotavyo, mantavyo, nididhyaasitavyo,' says the famous rishi Yaajnavalkya to his famous wife Maitreyi (Brhadaranyaka Upanishad 4.4.5), and he is normally taken to have meant that the steps of sravana, manana and nididhyasana ('listening, reasoning, and meditation') are necessary in order to attain the darsana (true knowledge) of the atman (self); see for instance tOrkobagiS (1978: 13) for this explication of the text. This is, again standardly, taken to mean that one should listen to some available version of the Sruti (material to be listened to)—preferably, the patriarchal culture of course adds, from an authoritative guru. That the word Sruti which corresponds to the Western term scripture designates an object of listening rather than reading is of more importance to us than the orthodox claim that only the Vedas count as Sruti. For that claim merely set the Vedas up as an H object of reverence; the same gesture effectively limited their real power.

To understand more about how the community came to knowledge to the community, we have to turn to the account offered in the fifth century CE classic Vaakyapadiya ('On sentences and words') by the metagrammarian Bhartrhari. Using the term aagama 'coming, i.e., material which has come down, has been passed on by tradition' for scripture more often than Sruti (but using both terms interchangeably with Sastra), he argues as follows:

Right conduct is not established by reasoning dissociated from scripture for its reference. No one can refute by reasoning or by argument of empirical obviousness those unbroken and traditional paths of right conduct. Rarely are the natures of substances known from inference, since their properties vary with variations in their state, place of time . ... Even a conclusion inferred after great consideration by clever logicians is decided to be otherwise by others more qualified. Such a knowledge as discriminates between different diamonds, different coins etc.,—a knowledge which cannot be described to others—arises in those who possess it, only from practice; it is not inferential . . . . The words of those who perceive the supersensual and non-cognisable objects with the eyes of a sage are not refuted by inferential reasoning. When a man does not doubt the perceptual knowledge (of a reliable person) as if it were his own, how can another one (given to reasoning) make him who (thus) stands on the side of perception, turn back? The scriptural truth is of equal use to all humanity down to the lower classes in their judgements 'this is virtue' and 'this is sin'. (1: 30-40) Even when different schools (of aagamas) perish and there are no new authors, mankind does not transgress the duties prescribed by the scriptures and the books of precepts. If knowledge were instinctive, then scriptures would be of no use; but if virtue is the root of knowledge then the source of knowledge is not inborn. (1: 134)

Not a word about the supposed sacredness of the specific injunctions laid down in the particular texts we know as the Vedas. The argument is quite general and serves to establish the absolute and prediscursive validity, for the community, of some linguistically available and traditionally received articulation of the community's certainties, not necessarily in the shape of an exactly reproducible text, but at the level of Wittgenstein's practical-cultural notion of certainty. Note the assumption that this received wisdom is, in an essentially undistorted version, available to the lower classes (the term used is chandala) and is comparable to the tacit knowledge of substances acquired in practice. Thus Bhartrhari cannot be referring to the Veda texts as such. He does assume that, for his culture, those texts may be taken to embody the impersonal aagama or Sruti material that constitutes the absolute basis for all discourse.

But he is assuming that what matters is the stuff that gets orally transmitted even to the most marginal members of the community—the bedrock ethical principles. By definition, such transmission happens without ritual initiations and preachings, simply through the normal work of bringing human children up and telling them stories.

The crucial part of his discussion is his denial of the centrality of books at verse 134: 'Even when different schools (of aagamas) perish and there are no new authors, mankind does not transgress the duties prescribed by the scriptures and the books of precepts' — an insight immediately followed by the reminder that the reason cannot be instinct, for if instinct sufficed to ensure virtue then there would have been no aagamas in the first place. The denial of the necessity of the continuous availability of actual books, coupled with the denial of an instinctual basis for ethical continuity, leaves us with the oral tradition as the basis of culture, and with listening as the heart of learning.

This does not say, in a populist and anti-intellectual vein, that book learning is beside the point even when your civilization is alive and well and there are lots of books and authors around. On the contrary, that is the sort of period for which the crucial point is that 'a man does not doubt the perceptual knowledge (of a reliable person) as if it were his own'—the community learns from its intellectuals by listening to them; the intellectuals consolidate their learning by writing books for each other and making it available to the popular ear by talking about what they have consolidated, until the essence of it reaches even the bottom of the hierarchy. A further stage in the process of making listening central to the community's cognitive system was reached in the centuries after Bhartrhari wrote this. In the Bhakti-Sufi period, from about the eighth century up to about the sixteenth, culminating perhaps in the mysticism of the emperor Akbar, there was a massive (and as yet undescribed) mutation of the cognitive space of India, what an early-Foucault-type analysis would treat as a mutation in India's episteme. In music, the formally restrictive dhrupad yielded the dominant position to the expressive and personal khayaal. In philosophy, there was the epistemological revolution initiated by neo-logic or navya-nyaya with its inquiry into modes of empirical certainty and inference, and soon carried over into grammar, poetics, and other theoretical domains. In religious organization, the book-bound form of the scriptures gave way to the song and the orally transmissible poem as the preferred mode of expression of the new teachers, and this accompanied a partial de-brahminization of the structure of religious authority. While it may seem curious to include the intellectual navya revolution in this list, we shall argue in chapter 5 that this revolution was secularizing and personalist in its content and effects, especially in the context of the Vedantic paradigm; thus this shift was part of the broadening of the space of personal listening.

The epistemic mutation just mentioned placed myth or the popular-auditory availability of the core discourse at the heart of the culture's cognitivity and translated Bhartrhari's reading of the Sruti concept into a post-classical social practice. Ever since, it has been the L sector of mainstream Indian culture, codified around the mediaeval translations of the epics, that runs the overall show in which the H element (in Sanskrit or some other language of power) appears at specified times and places.

This shift placed India's cultural centre of gravity in its L discourses and, in the middle ages, founded this country's distinctive brand of modernity. It is thus an L-centred India, increasingly confident in its handling of its discourses, that uses English as an instrumental H discourse coupled with India's L discourses in donor-receptor relationships of the sort described in chapter 2. This is our short answer to the 'which India' question. A longer version appears in chapter 5.

## Notes

1. Readers may ask at this point: what, then, is it a case of? Indian English writing is a go-between, self-consciously poised between two spaces (Indian and English) of primary creativity but in its present form anaphoric to the metropolitan English antecedent discourse it wishes to take part in rather than to the Indian material it claims to speak for. This location makes such writing basically a translative exercise. The task of translation is taken as an intellectual challenge, in keeping with the technical and purpose-bound nature of the presence of English in India. So there emerges, around this task and the language learning activity leading to it, a certain amount of practice and play to get the athletes into shape; primary (i.e., not explicitly translational) Indian literary efforts in English sometimes amount to such practice, but sometimes they represent an indirect, non-document-bound rendering or renarration of the loose cultural narratives of India and thus get into the business of translation without saying so. All this is part of the much more fundamental fact of formal work by Indians in English—the legal, scientific, technological, and analytical-discursive-descriptive sectors of technical writing in English done by Indians as part of their Productive Labour. That, or informal practice for that, is what all Indian writing in English is really a case of.

2. The writings cited here are reproduced in the Lal (1987) collection which mentions the original publication dates but gives no other details (periodical, city, etc.). We shall describe the passages as 1951/1987, 1959/1987 and so on, but cannot say where they appeared in 1951, 1959, etc.

3. Lal writes (1951/1987: 26): 'There is little use pretending that Indo-Anglian poetry can embrace the whole fabric of our national life and customs. It cannot. If we start with the assumption that poetry is the refined expression of the sensitive life of a people through a few extra-sensitive persons, and must ultimately appeal to all the people and form part of their heritage in the future, Indo-Anglian poetry is doomed. Indo-Anglian poets are content to express only the urban Indian consciousness, its complexity, despair and occasional nobility. And poetry in English which tries to express faithfully the tradition-rooted life of agricultural India runs, it seems to me, after a will-o'-the-wisp, and will eventually either fall into the pitfall of superficial polish and sentiment (as in the case of Mrs. Naidu) or deviate into the nebulous mystical metaphysics of Sri Aurobindo, who sincerely believed he was plumbing in his verse the essential sources of Indian tradition.'

4. Lal writes (1951/1987: 22-23): 'Many readers, in this country and abroad, have been taken in by the facile curds-and-whey lyricism of Sarojini Naidu. The late Mrs. Naidu was often admired for extra-poetic reasons; her poems went hand in hand with the first flush of nationalism, and her clever romanticising of the Indian peasant, however out of touch with the reality, impresses the hurried reader [...] The following lines occur in Mrs. Naidu's Slumber Song for Sunalini, her daughter; the poem is written 'in a Bengalee metre':

Where the golden, glowing
Champak-buds are blowing,
By the swiftly-flowing streams,
Now, when day is dying,
There are fairies flying
Scattering a cloud of dreams.

There are reasons to wonder why such sentiment should ever be allowed to get into print, but we shall limit ourselves to criticism of the technique. Had Toru Dutt indulged in rhyming 'glowing' and 'blowing' with the internal 'flowing', she might have been pardoned, being closer in time to Swinburne than to Mr. T.S. Eliot. Mrs. Naidu wrote this poem some time in the thirties, but even no Georgian went to the extent of mistaking a claptrap jingle for a rhyme. And what Mrs. Naidu meant by calling perfect trochaic trimetre, with variations in the third and sixth lines, a 'Bengalee metre' is, of course, something which will forever puzzle any reader who has an average knowledge of the syllabic differences between Bengali and English prosody. The average reader should also be permitted to wonder why champak-buds should always glow and blow and rivers always swiftly flow, instead of doing something less irritatingly poetic. The second stanza clinches the reader's exasperation by reminding him that singing slumber-spirits winging through the forest are bringing 'baby-visions sheeny' for Sunalini . . . 'Sheeny'!

5. Lal says the following about Aurobindo: 'When I read [...] any passage from Sri Aurobindo's 'epics', a sick-as-stale-lemonade shiver gallops up and down my spine at a rate impossible to compute' (1951/1987: 223).

6. Kachru writes (pp. 131-32): 'The linguistic factors which generally determine the Indianness of IE are not different from those in any other language-contact situation. In such a situation, we are mainly concerned with what we have termed in chapter 3 the process of transfer. In linguistic literature transfer is essentially used in the sense of interference at any linguistic level. I propose to make a broader use of the term and to include under it certain non-linguistic elements as well. I shall consider the process of transfer in IE in terms of the following three types.

1. Transfer of context: This involves transfer of those cultural patterns (units) which are absent or different in those cultures where English is used as L1. For instance, in IE fiction the following cultural patterns, which repeatedly occur in typically Indian plots, come under such transfer: the caste system, social attitudes, social and religious taboos, superstitions, notions of superiority and inferiority.

2. Transfer of L1 meanings to L2 items [. . .] [example: flower-bed].

3. Transfer of form-context component [. . .] [example: (b) Greetings: [. . .] fall at your feet].'
