## Notes

in the same manner in which we converse with our friends. The Americans, on the other hand, transport the habits of public life into their manners in private; in their country the jury is introduced into the games of schoolboys, and the parliamentary forms are observed in the order of a feast.’


2. ‘The old philosophers were ever seeking this, and even modern scientists are impelled by this urge. All our schemes and planning, our ideas of education and social and political organization, have at their back the search for unity and harmony’ (Nehru 1974: 156).


3. The passage in Nehru is as follows (1974: 92): ‘There is a question in the Upanishads to which a very curious and yet significant answer is given. “The question is: ‘What is the universe? From what does it arise? Into what does it go? And the answer is: ‘In freedom it arises, in freedom it rests, and into freedom it melts away.” ”’ It is unclear which translation Nehru is quoting. But it seems likely that the reference is to the Taittiriiya Upanishad, where there is such a question at 3.1.1 and where the final answer is ‘aanandaad dhy eva khalv imaani bhuutaani jaayante. aanandena jaataani jiivanti. aanandam prayanty abhisaMviSanti’ (3.6.1), which may be freely translated to yield Nehru's English text. Note that it is unimportant if it turns out that Nehru was factually unaware that the keyword aananda occurs in the Sanskrit version of this passage, he goes on to say that the important thing for him is ‘that the authors of the Upanishads were passionately attached to the idea of freedom and wanted to see everything in terms of it’ (p. 92), which means that it is the term freedom that attracts him to this passage.


4. ‘History has numerous instances of old and well-established civilizations fading away or being ended suddenly, and vigorous new cultures taking their place. Is it some vital energy, some inner source of strength that gives life to a civilization or a people, without which all effort is ineffective, like the vain attempt of an aged person to play the part of a youth?’ (Nehru 1974: 55). .


5. ‘We in India do not have to go abroad in search of the past and the distant. We have them here in abundance. If we go to foreign countries it is in search of the present. That search is necessary, for isolation from it means backwardness and decay’ (Nehru 1974: 565).


6. ‘The independence of the United States is more or less contemporaneous with the loss of freedom by India. Surveying the past century and a half, an Indian looks somewhat wistfully and longingly at the vast progress made by the United States during this period, and compares it with what has been done and what has not been done in his own country. It is true no doubt that the Americans have many virtues and we have many failings, that America offered a virgin field and an almost clean slate to write upon while we were cluttered up with ancient memories and traditions. And yet perhaps it is not inconceivable that if Britain had not undertaken this great burden in India and, as she tells us, endeavoured for so long to teach us the difficult art of self-government, of which we had been so ignorant, India might not only have been freer and more prosperous, but also far more advanced in science and art and all that makes life worth living’ (Nehru 1974: 457).



# Chapter 5: India/Bharat

## 5.1 Images

The Constitution of India, in its familiar preamble, says that ‘we the people of India, that is Bharat’ constitute ourselves as a republic by giving ourselves this Constitution. The transition from the instrumentality of a modernizing India (marked in its very name by the British legacy) to the restored wholeness of a future Bharat which will have used this instrument to regain its authentic national selfhood is a goal that not only underlies the programme for social transformation envisaged in the constitution, but even inspires the rhetoric of later generations.

Sharad Pawar and Sharad Yadav, for instance, find it appropriate to denounce urban

India’s oppression of rural Bharat, as they put it. Note that the 1980 echo of the Constitution’s antithesis between India and Bharat is able to appeal to the experience of the intervening decades. After independence, the nation witnesses a series of authenticity-seeking restorations of pre-British names. The states of Madras and Mysore became Tamil Nadu and Karnataka. The cities of Trivandrum and Poona go back to being Tiruvananthapuram and Pune. This development sets the stage for the assertive, rurally based regionalism of the eighties. When the two Sharads counterpose India and Bharat in 1980, the background includes an already established association of indigenous names with authentic roots in the soil.

Even the discourse in English participates in the construction of such images of rooted authenticity. The many local and regional images of a Kerala, a Tamil Nadu, a Maharashtra, or a Karnataka converge on the superimage of a Bharat that is to emerge from the massive project of development and decolonization. Hence the use of the form Bharat in English names like Bharatgas, Bharat Forge, Bharat Heavy Electricals, given to some of the more visible actors in the drama of techno-industrial modernization. Our relatedness to an India/Bharat that has thus been marked as a culturally contested territory from the very inception of its post-colonial modernity means that any discourse that claims to improve our understanding of the matter can only exist as an extension or continuation of the general discourse that constructs and sustains the telos of a modernizing India preparing to attain the authentic selfhood and cultural self-determination of a Bharat completely free from Western control. The images of an instrumental India (the means) and a final Bharat (the end) are perceptually real, and yet this volume not only hears and works with them but also explicitly discusses them, for discourse includes all forms of metadiscourse that hold up its constructs for separate inspection. Like all discourse, what this volume thematizes are constructs on the basis of this reflexivity available to all discourse. We propose interpretations of certain enjoying access to realities unperceived by ordinary mortals. Hence the use of the term ‘null metadiscourse’.

However, we do draw, as all discussants do, on any specialized knowledge that this or that discipline may provide us with. We occasionally even make crucial use of such knowledge in the discussion, for there is no implication that ordinary persons always

We do more than specialists do. The point is that we do not seek to confer validity on our claims by locating them within the narrow confines of a particular discipline. Instead, we seek to develop a method of steady listening. Listening to specialists as well as to ordinary speakers of the languages we are concerned with, in certain cases we think we can hear a more complete and intelligible symphony (or discord) than one hears if one restricts one’s listen to what linguistics or socio-linguistics or literary theory or the might encourage one to accept as the way things really sound. It is such cases that we try to share with others the specific results of listening. We present these results in a manner that reflects listening process by being plurally attuned to various disciplines to the national discourse that underwrites them all by giving

1 specific niches in the ecology of intellectual labour. The apparatus of our presentation, then, employs components of the relevant disciplines, but does not endorse any overall linguistic or literary paradigm or any of the socio-linguistic approaches, as and these paradigms have achieved closure by withdrawing from dialogical contact with the general discourse and with each other. It is in reaction to this self-defeating closure that we have chosen to resort to the null metadiscourse as a relatively open apparatus for presenting our interpretation of the images and styles in terms of which the community construes its linguistic existence.

Thus, our method of diffuse listening as well as our corresponding plural expository apparatus respects the rationality of the community whose general discourse ours is an extension of. The present chapter argues that the general rationality of the Indian public on a foundation of listening which goes back to the mediaeval emergence of India’s regional languages as separate foci of linguistic codification. It is this auditory foundation that controls the deployment of the English-linked textual rationality as an H instrument dia’s discursive repertoire. Our proposals about the way this model works are intended as preliminary remarks on the Indian version of FESH or the Formal Elaboration of Social Hierarchy, a phenomenon whose broader Asian range of manifestations would

The division of labour between chapters 5 and 6 is as follows.

Chapter 5 offers an immanent account of the auditory rationality of the Bharat which employs the textual rationality of India as an instrument enabling Bharat gradually to come into its own. Chapter

6 asks how Bharat controls the process and prevents India’s instrumental power from getting out of hand.

The present section, on Images, reformulates the question ‘Which India controls and uses English as an instrument of modernization?’ in terms of sub-questions about the nature and role of India and Bharat as nation-images and the associated types of discourse reception, learning, modernization, and development. The project here is to make sense of Bharat’s proverbial laziness as a counterpoint to the image presented in chapter 4 of a proverbially successful America, and to be methodologically careful about what we are doing to make these contrasting images intelligible.

Section 5.2, on Stylization, develops the image of Bharat in terms of a rationality that dissolves complexity not by deriving the composite from the simple through a single mediation system but by diversifying the complexity. Such a culture thematizes style, for it codifies stylistic diversity in order to ensure the stability of such solutions to problems.

Section 5.3 on Coding, which characterizes the stylizing mode, and section 5.4 on Recoding, which describes the mediaeval Indian refocusing that inflected this mode into what we see today, offer an account of FESH and spell out its global implications.

We begin the work of this section by coming to the point at once. Our central proposal is that, at the post-modern moment of what one would pre-theoretically describe as modernizaton, teaching gives way to learning, making it apparent that development can proceed only to the extent that the process takes place at the pleasure of the people. Several key concepts are involved here. They call for clarification and discussion.

One way to approach the key concept of pleasure is to see the newly self-confident public in the light of their recovery of the right to self-identification. As we explore this theme, we see more clearly the nature of the post-modern transition from the unified history of ‘progress’ (in which a unique enlightening Subject, embodied as the West on our planet as distinct from other possible planets, legitimately treats us all as objects) to a differentiated geography of dialogue and mutual learning. The heart of our view is the claim that the post-modern transition is from a teaching mode to a learning mode. This way of putting the matter is to be construed in relation to the idea of Habermas 1984 that social and individual modernization is a process of maximization of learning and openness, a process that brings real communicative behaviour closer to the ideal situation which Habermas's theory of universal pragmatics postulates as the immanent goal implicit in all communication.

Some key questions involved here, of course, are: who is learning what from whom and why? How does the typical unit of learning or the typical community of learners define itself vis-a-vis the sources of understanding, and what is the politics of such self-definitions? We shall see that the answers to these questions change as one moves from the modern moment proper to the post-modern phase of modernization.

Consider first the modern moment, at which the world centre of enlightenment, or the West understood as a cardinal source of knowledge (and thus as an ideal type only imperfectly embodied in France or England or the United States), is teaching the world the lesson of techno-industrial nationalism. Among those who take this lesson to heart is the Pramatha Chaudhuri described in chapter

2. Recall that he appeals to the authority of Life in support of the proposal to make a speechlike variety of Bangla the new literary standard and to phase out the moribund archaic variety. The Youth or Life he spoke for was fighting for control over the nation’s History, over the course of Progress towards techno-economic independence for the country and an appropriate socio-educational base enabling such a nation to sustain a normal rate of progress. His was a historical Life, concerned with the nation as an arena of history.

Life in the post-modern phase, in contrast, struggles to reclaim particular sub-spaces of the country’s geography. This territorial emphasis, voiced by regional and other sectional interests, segments and obscures the older nationalism whose achievements are taken for granted and relegated to the past. The spatial movement respecifies and reclaims segments of what the successful nationalist movement has occupied and marked out as the national territory on which the nation’s history of progress shall be enacted. The spatial period enacts precisely this history, thus retaining some continuity with the nationalist project, but rewrites the history as specific segmental and intersegmental narratives.

The protagonists of these narratives are not abstract or unspecified actors like the Indian people, but concrete and articulate publics like the category of students, or women, or dalits. Consequently, their rewriting of history amounts to a spatial dispersion of what was seen as a single vector of progress into a spectrum of distinct and partly overlapping progressions.

In view of this manoeuvre of retaining overall continuity with, but at the same time particularizingly-substantializingly overwriting, the general or formal content of nationalism, we need to revise our tentative idea that it was an American-style activist model of history-making that Nehru’s India sought to replicate in its quest for Bharat. For activism as a model of history-making, and as a way of understanding history which feeds the consciousness of such history-makers, is intelligible only as an exportable universal paradigm. It posits history as a common human future-building enterprise open to all comers. Now, if a spatializing overlay buries the potentially activist land under an actually differential jungle of territory-marking specificities, then ‘at a certain level the whole enterprise of flowing with a man-made history into a utopian future is imperilled. For the sprawl of mutually hostile monuments then makes the underlying unity invisible, inaccessible, and psychologically unreal to the public. It might seem, therefore, that the very project of modernization, which had sought to maximize the openness of every wing of the human enterprise to every other wing, is endangered in the post-modern or regionalizing period that we are describing.

It is indeed true that the Indian elite’s attempt to buy the American activist relationship with history and to sell it, in the teaching mode, to the population does begin to break down under the spatial respecification of the project. This is one of the shifts at the post-modern moment.

However, modernization as a whole, and the ‘life’ that makes it tick, remain in touch with the life that Pramatha Chaudhuri had appealed to. It may be useful to resort to a notion of recoding in our efforts to understand how life, when it transforms the energies common human history of undifferentiated progress into the distinct and fragmentary initiatives of concrete publics, preserves some continuity between the old project and the new. Life recodes the project, respecifying the pursuit of progress as a dispersion of pursuits. The nationalist issue of popular control of the territory as a whole gives way to the post-nationalist agenda of a public dialogue that pluralizes the old normativity in terms of sub-spaces and questions what had been considered sacred. The old images which were vital at the modern moment proper recede from the view, and one’s attention moves to new images articulating sectional and regional interests.

It is natural that this recoding of the constituents of the nation should bring in its wake a new reading of the layers of Indian history which coexist spatially in India’s present (in a manner memorably described by Kosambi 1970: chapter 2), corresponding to the realignment of cultural forces. The history which nationalist thought had built around what it viewed as classics needs to be reread as part of the recoding at our post-modern moment in order to understand the shift taking place today. The project of this volume is one small part of the work of listening to and articulating today’s rereading of the history of this land as Bharat rather than - India. In the light of the ambiguity of the ‘history’ brought to the fore in the American section of chapter 4, we must add that readings or construals of past history are always simultaneously embedded in history-making projects involving specific attitudes to the future, and that consequently a country with many pasts complexly coexisting in the present is also a land oriented towards many futures all at once.

It is now possible to return to the questions ‘Who is learning what from whom and why?’ and ‘How does the typical community of learners define itself and what is the politics of such self-definitions?’, the answers to which change as one moves from the modern to the post-modern moment of the modernization process.

In the modern phase, inaugurated by the British Raj and continued in Nehru’s republic, the answers are that Indians are learning the modern religion (its principles of science and practice of technology) from its Western high priests in order to acquire direct access to the divine possibility of ensuring a painless, poverty-free life for all citizens of the country, and that the typical community of learners defines itself as a nation that is struggling for or has just attained political independence, this self-definitional process being part of the modern configuration of forces as a (global) whole. In the post-modern moment that emerges out of and modifies this configuration as modernization proceeds, we move away from this scenario built around an Indian elite learning technological modernity from the West in English and teaching it to its people in their languages in order to maximize some technologically definable welfare function. Instead, we have a group of collectivities in Bharat learning from each other the lesson of social modernity, dialogically developing a form of public life reproducible by and thus suitable for such a large and heterogeneous population. Among these collectivities is the Indian elite which thinks it is still engaged in the type of modernization inaugurated under the British; and it suits the other collectivities in Bharat to humour this sub-population and temporarily let it continue to think so while it steadily loses its elitehood, pending the emergence of another viable codification of the cultural and social realities.

This new period answers our key questions as follows. It is the separate collectivities within Bharat which are learning modernity, conceived not techno-industrially but as a social openness emerging out of negotiation, from each other, counting the Indian elite as one of the collectivities and not as the single source of modern

"radiation. In this process, the typical learner-unit or community of learners defines itself in segmental terms, ethnically or on the basis of region or caste or the rural-urban polarization or religion or some combination of these factors. The power game which produces and modifies such community boundary demarcations from time to time is the multi-segmental narrative of independent Bharat’s politics. Hence, for instance, the varied fortunes of separate ethnic identities within what is officially assumed to be the Hindi-speaking region (see Brass [1974] for a standard account). As for the goal of the learning process, it is no longer primarily a collective national target such as the removal of poverty, but a set of sub-national pursuits of self-interest as perceived, non-technically, by the various ‘selves’ or communities according to their specific cognitive styles and attitudes towards progress or technology.

As a consequence of this shift from the teaching mode, where the Indian elite took the social and cognitive initiative, to the learning mode, in which Bharat's many collectivities unevenly and regionally initiate processes of learning whose very brokenness reflects the (plural) pleasure of the people and marks the limits beyond which the modernization project cannot proceed, the nation-image of Bharat begins to emerge as a new reality, capable of constructing a credible past and future for itself and of contesting the India image’s presence as well as its projections into the past and the future. We shall consider four domains in which the contrast between the two images is already clear.

First, consider discourse reception. Assume that our discussion in chapter 2 of discourse reception as the arena for diglossic differentiations is neutral between various forms of the teaching-learning nexus, and that therefore a notion of discourse reception is available for India and Bharat to fight over. Now, the India image corresponds to a teacher-centred equation between the teaching and the learning; it is the system interrelating the simples and the complexes, in this picture, that calls the shots and decides how the syllabus is going to meet half-way what the learner finds easy or hard at a given stage of the elite-controlled game. In contrast, the Bharat image is associated with a learning game which the learner controls by giving the teacher a lot of rope and letting him or her go all the way and yet refusing full emotional consent. This refusal the typical learner in Bharat achieves by focusing in an exaggeratedly formal fashion on the content of what is learnt, by memorizing lists of points, by treating examination success as a definitive correlate of adequate mastery (with all the forms of sidestepping that this attitude produces, such as mass copying and coaching classes), and thus refusing to engage any personal element, which could conceivably co-involve the teacher, in the job of learning. Consequently, the Bharatiya learner as a person who defines him or herself in terms of what strikes him or her as easy or pleasant or readily accessible remains in principle untouched by the cards that are there to play with. As an independent user of an external system, such a person is able to welcome some material and resist the rest. This discrimination appears to take the form of faulty or fragmentary learning and to show up in mistakes. That it is often seen in this way reflects the teacher-centred or India-based perspective which controls the hegemonic perception. It is possible to reinterpret the prevalent mistakes and limitations as the emerging contours of the Bharat which has been listening quite carefully, but from a safe distance, and which has retained its freedom to decide what it will accept and what it will not.

Our second domain is learning as such, not necessarily in the institutional set-up where one couples it with teaching and therefore with discourse reception. Here the contrast is between an India where learning styles, while they vary from the authoritarian-receptive British imports of the nineteenth century to the public-normative American imports of the middle and late twentieth (as observed in places like the clichetic INU, understood no doubt as an ideal type), nevertheless consistently combine a solid faith in the technical (scientific and cultural) authenticity of Western cognitive and industrial methods with a stoic despair reflecting the sense that they never work on the evil soil of India, and on the other hand a Bharat where the learner knows that the torrential rains of our minds always wash away much of what we pick up from any source and stops worrying about the exact identities of the items that stay or get inundated, satisfied with the job of working with whatever consistently comes out in the wash and works for us, not interested in postulating a single divinity (such as a consistent Western system of thought) who is supposed to bless all that the learner knows and sanctify all the items as authentic or modern, content to live with the secular polytheism which authorizes different gods to sanctify different kinds of sanctity.

In our third domain, modernization, India has been the proverbial backwater of the world, always getting everything second-hand, troubled about such matters as existentialism and structuralism a couple of decades after their Western salespersons had lapsed into slumber or death, content to tag along with others and to accept their definitions of modernity which define India’s behaviour as a case of tagging along. Bharat has been one of the world leaders, unselfconsciously practising all along what the avant-garde modernization theorists today are at last beginning to preach, namely, the formally bridled pursuit of pleasure in its style of modernization. Bharat has invented the art of non-action as a way of driving opponents up the wall, and has institutionalized the culture of bandhs and festive agitations during specified and comfortable hours of the day. Sharing with the rest of what the workaholic West calls the Third World the so-called mañana mentality (the attitude that what can be done tomorrow, mariana in Spanish, should not be done today), but‘adding to the practice of that form of resistance to workaholism an extended Gandhian theory of selective inaction inflected in the un-Gandhian direction of pleasure, Bharat has specialized in such recherché forms of protest as the Finally, as these references to workaholism indicate, Bharat openly and obviously rejects the standard notion of development involving the unquestioning adoption of the completely time-bound, labour-based working style associated with prototypical cases of industrialization in the sense of the nineteenth century experience in the West. Bharatiyas take time off from living in order to labour when they have to, and they intend to bend the theory of development to suit this style, an intention which their practice manifests quite openly; what practice can do today, theory will say tomorrow.


## 5.2 Stylization


In order to understand the Bharat image more clearly, we have to face the questions surrounding such a formulation. What, for instance, could possibly underwrite a rejection of the workaholic notion of development? What mode of thought strong enough to keep a nation going could possibly afford to undermine the concept of labour and the associated strict relationship with time? We approach these obvious and immediate questions by turning, via the agricultural basis of post-modern regionalism, to the classical codifications of Bharat.

Bhaarat maataa gaaMv meM rahtii hai, mother Bharat lives in the village. Bharat lives also in the ruralized informal sector of domestic labour by women and of menial labour by children, and other such sectors which resist integration into the formality of official economic quantification of labour time. The new self-confidence of non-industrial Bharat in post-modern times under-writes what are usually taken to be struggles against the injustice suffered by informal workers. Such struggles, for instance those waged by women and formalized by their middle class articulators To that extent the new forces are bringing about a greater formalization and systematization of what was once informal labour, whittling down the possibilities of the pre-capitalist exploitation controlled by the market economy. However, it is important to stress also the antisystemic side of these struggles. The proposal is not that women’s work in their homes should be quantified in terms of hotel equivalents and paid for, for instance, but that the qualitative and contextual relations between domestic and market labour should be altered towards a new rationality not based exclusively on the notions of labour and market, a rationality capable of making sense of the specificity of a qualitatively defined home and of meaningfully engaging adult males in its running without undermining the socially necessary amount of alienated, non-domestic productive labour for quantitatively defined markets. To summarize, in this and other informal sectors the new forces are pushing society towards a certain contextualization which will situate different types of working time in specific niches of a cultural ecology of activity; this ecology does not invite an indus-trial, quantity-bound codification as basically an economy whose rationality happens to leave some sectors alone, but rather a use-value-oriented, home-centred formalization in terms of cycles which coordinate without claiming to homogenize all working time as virtually industrial labour time. As we shall see, this contextualization is driven by a public discourse in which conversations and shrutis (a term that will be defined more clearly below) jointly define contexts by coding them in terms of a normativity that inverts the logic of the chapter 4 account of the American public construction of a normative space. Setting aside for the moment this question of the mechanism driving the contextualization, we focus on the content of such codification with respect to the factor of time.

Kosambi (1970: 26-27 proposes to regard the Hindu ‘theory of endless cycles’ (manvantara)—which says that ‘the present dark (kali) age is to end in a universal deluge’ followed by ‘a new golden age . . , followed . . . by the three other ages of progressive decay, to end in another flood’—as ‘simply a projection of the dull seasonal life of the Indian village,” where ‘the October harvest is followed by cool weather with a season of health and plenty’, and then by ‘progressive scarcity, ending in a period when bitter toil under bad conditions is needed just to prepare the parched fields for sowing’, after which ‘the terrific monsoon rain floods all the land’ and then ‘the seasonal cycle repeats itself for another year of the same type’. Although the proposal is rather fanciful if seen as a serious hypothesis about the origins of decay narratives (for such narratives are also widespread elsewhere, under other skies), it helps us to notice certain analogies between the conceptual heterogeneity of time in the classical Hindu codification of four ages and the real variations in labour time in specifically the agricultural domain.

That these analogies may deserve attention becomes apparent when we turn to Gunnar Myrdal's suggestion (1970 that the study of Indian agriculture cannot be based on notions such as employment and unemployment which presuppose homogeneous, continuous, linear labour time as an economic reality, but calls for culture-sensitive theories reflecting the way different phases of the agricultural cycle shape the availability and types of human energy, and thus of what must be abstractly regarded as human time. Now, the Hindu view does not simply conceptualize the kali period (the present) in terms of ‘life spans becom([ing] shorter’ or ‘war, disease, poverty, and hunger afflictling] mankind because of its lapse from purity’, as Kosambi (1970: 26 puts it, but situates this cycle in a repertoire of spectra and hierarchies which codifies experience in terms of a play of energy levels. That enables us today to make fruitful use of the categories in this repertoire when we wish to work towards an indigenously based understanding of the realities of this culture. Consider the spectrum of types of materiality, from the entirely domain-bound anna ‘matter’, through the increasingly range-expansive praaNa ‘life’, manas ‘mind’ and vijnaana ‘abstract content of awareness’, to the infinite-ranging aananda ‘freedom’. Or consider the hierarchy of ontological states from sattva, pure and light existence, through rajas, opaque individuation, to tamas, heavy and sense-bound lethargy. Such categorizations and the. four-age cosmic cycle can be brought to bear on each other to provide a coherent and empirically interesting account of experience, and are so brought to bear by traditional commentators such as Sri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa (1983).

The main interest of the traditional view lies in its segmental heterogenization of time and its formalization of the play of segments. The tradition chops time up into segments such as ages in the cycle from epiphany to deluge. The segments are so defined that time itself flows differently in different segments. The events whose rhythms constitute the periodicities of time fall under segment-specific laws, as do human energy-investments pertaining to actions bringing about the crucial events. The overall law of the cycle, which governs the fact of this diversification of laws, is one of play, formalized in the decision to call the ages of the cosmic cycle krta, tretaa, dvaapara, kali, which in their primary senses are names of particular throws in the classical Indian game of dice the least lucky. In other words, the cosmos, which chooses to diversify the flows of time itself in different ages, is portrayed as being playfully pleased to do so, and this pleasure is in principle the same as what a human individual experiences during play. On such a view, whatever regularities one may discern or apply function only within a style specific to a segment, a style of events and actions and rhythms which cannot be used to interpret other segments. The culture of Bharat handles and sustains diversity by formalizing plurality in terms of stylization; its habit of stringing segments together into cycles and spectra and hierarchies enables it to cope with the multiplicity and heterogeneity of styles. The particular implementation of such a codifying principle found in the classical documents of this or that tradition within the Bharatiya formation are of course optional, as is apparent from the diversity of codifications in space and time. How does a particular public within such a culture decide on a valid codification of segments and styles that distributes the styles over its socio-pragmatic space and articulates a division of labour? To put the question differently, how can public discourse in such a culture constitute a normativity without violating its spirit of plurality and stylization? As promised above, our answer to this question is that conversations and shrutis co-define the terms of the particular contextualization accepted by a given spatio-temporal region of Bharatiya culture, and it is this mechanism that constitutes Bharat’s alternative to the workaholic construction of normativity character-istic of a modernity of the American type. The following remarks - represent one possible unpacking of this answer.

The naturalistic model familiar from chapter 4’s account of the United States takes the individual's natural notion of happiness as a point of departure and makes the subjective pursuit of such happiness, needing the help of other co-pursuants to achieve it, the driving force of social integration and construction of norms, understood as summaries of different individuals’ conveniences in a joint pursuit of happiness which is more convenient than separate and unconnected trips to that end. In this joint construction of the text of social norms, each person’s contribution to the public discussion counts as a draft of the final text and thus as a spoken text to be amalgamated, through modifications, with the speeches made by other discussants in the debate. Thus, the game is one of moving up, inductively, from initial texts on the subjective ground to a final social text in the sky. This is a tense game, for the participants have to carry the burden of the collective text held up by their individual texts.

In contrast, the Bharatiya game is a relaxed one. The assumption is that one can postulate the necessary social texts as being already present. The task of the community is to take those pre-existing validities and inhabit them effectively, learning how to adapt those sky-bred principles to the constantly renegotiated game on the ground, how to render them fit for use in the evolving homes of persons whose separate practices of play only partly intersect with the theories of work used by these persons as tools for bringing their practices into a reasonable degree of alignment with the practices of other persons. Such a task cannot be a single pursuit of a normative centre, to be embodied ideally as a constitution and a bill of rights, but becomes a dispersed activity of naturalizing conversations whereby the members of the community accept and modulate what-they-hear-as-normative-texts, a notion which we designate here as Sruti (written with sh in our informal English prose when rigorous transcription is unimportant), following essentially Bhartrhari’s use of this term in his Vaakyapadiya (recall the discussion in chapter 4). In these conversations, the public actively listens to the texts and rereads them by speaking them into forms of personal life for which the bottom line, as in all cultures, is the contours of pleasure marking out what most members of the community find pleasant or comfortable. In so revalidating the textual validities as forms of a livable life, the Bharatiya public concretizes its texts and disperses them into contexts of listening.

A listening must have someone to listen to. Exactly as in the outline provided by Bhartrhari, this public makes its gurus mediate between the classical verities in heaven and ground realities on earth by translating the old texts into contemporary expositions. The way the public controls its gurus is by effecting a double mythicization. First, it bathes the gurus in a glory which disables them and frames them, ensuring that the action of their narratives will feed only the channels of awe and not overwhelm the normal practices of life. Second, it refuses to participate even vicariously in the academic discourse of the textuality from which the gurus derive their sermons, and thus it forces the gurus to resort to narrative and picturesque paraphrase in order to make their points accessible to a public waiting to be entertained into some comprehension of what the texts say about the styles associated with particular segments of reality. The narrative form compels the gurus to mythicize the content of the texts they claim to be working from.

This is not a heavy inductive trip, as in an American construction of a consensual normativity, but a light hypothetico-deductive trip, which first posits the availability of some classical text and then enlists the aid of translators who help the public to derive viable styles of living from whatever bits of the text they feel they can live with.

To elaborate further this reading of the contrast between work-aholic America and the proverbially lazy Bharat as images, we may note that an activist utopia postulates an ideal of unification, assuming that all modern humans will end up rationally arriving at a joint game (though a competitive one) integrating all pursuits of happiness into the same naturalistic definition of happiness expressible in, and thus best embodied by, a single normative language. In contrast, the Bharatiya mode of history-making tends towards an idea! of diffusion, not of compulsive focusing. The picture is one of different kinds of people, with spectra of productive capabilities and receptive needs reflecting their vardous locations vis-a-vis certain cycles and repertoires, listening to the same basic inheritance but hearing different signals and thus translating the base into different subcommunity-identities, scattering the pre-existent and thus always available human unity into a whole zoo of little normative languages and embodiments to have fun with. If the American approach to history-making is an activist model, one may call the Bharatiya approach a receptionist model. This designation helps us to see that production is not the main point. Consequently, the workaholic pursuit of production ceases to be the issue. The main issue, given the Bharatiya style of history-making, is ensuring that all segments of a population can flow in their appropriate histories at a pace they feel comfortable with, with as little loss of life and pleasure as possible.

Such a stylizing model can define modernization only in terms of a heightened awareness in each segmental subcommunity about the paces and styles of its neighbours and maximizing the uni-versality of such cross-boundary awareness—not, as in an activist model, on the basis of an increasing pace of production (as science) and consumption (as technology) of an impersonal knowledge-control of the material universe empowering science-knows-who to ensure happiness science-knows-where.

Consequently, the learning which Habermasian theories regard as central to the modernization process is inflected in the receptionist model as communities learning to tune in and perceive each other as living in the same world but on a somewhat different wavelength or ‘time’-length, if time may be seen as a metaphor for the human division of labour and activity. Technical or systematic learning is simply a special case. Learning high technology from the masters of the metropolitan machine world is a very special case of learning how to attune oneself to the existence of com-munities of white, mechanistic, mastery-seeking men who pursue their own happiness and the misery of others.

The image of Bharat, then, begins to take shape as a concrete project distinct from but capable of containing activism. This receptionist project is able to assimilate an activist sub-routine into its stylized repertoire of styles. We have seen this in the context of the enterprise of developing one particular nation, an India that will pave the way to a Bharat. But we see the project more clearly if we expand its boundaries and recast it as a possible model for global modernization. So extended, the receptionist project becomes an alternative model of universality, capable of competing with the Western activist and patrimonial models, and of raising fresh questions about the viability of this and other models of a universal history/future.


## 5.3 Coding


In the remainder of this chapter, we examine with some care the logic of the receptionist model and its development in Bharat’s history. The present section identifies the core mechanisms of the hie model and traces their emergence in classical or ancient Bharat. modify receptionism in the post-classical or mediaeval period and give it the form that today’s Bharat inherits, a form that can be the suits in what this book’s dominant metaphor views as a pack of cards. FESH is able to bring the whole territory under the legitimate and accepted hegemony of the Cardland style by formalizing the margins as part of an extended kinship network, thus ensuring that nothing lies outside the codcodification. Margins and boundaries are centre, to whose viewpoint the formalizing or codifying could be base from which the specific marginality of each category is to be according to the informal home as the cognitive base, we have an oral mode of cognition whose tradition of learning versified lists by heart ceremonializes the closure of such listing as a performance and thus, making it obvious that the lists are a device, prevents the reification of a particular set of lists into a text or the growth of an a hierarchy. Classical Bharat was a battleground between a social kshatriya brethren proposing (with some cultural help from the Buddhist monastic system) to project a populist image through the systematic institutional use of speechlike norms such as Pali and * regional varieties of Prakrits, on the one hand, and a social organization claiming to embody the cultural power of the brahmins and their eternal Sanskrit on the other hand. Both forms of organization were hierarchical, the brahminical one more explicitly so. For reasons that historians continue to analyze, it was the brahminical system that prevailed, and the classical narratives were taken over by Sanskrit. Consequently, when scholars classifying lexical items in Indo-Aryan languages today speak of tatsama words and tadbhava words, referring to Sanskrit as ‘tad’ or ‘that’, they testify to the staying power of old resolutions of conflicts: the assumption implicit in these terms is that some words are ‘the same as that’ (tatsama) in the sense of being Sanskrit words that have remained unchanged throughout eternity, while other words have ‘originated from that’ (tadbhava) and, alas, undergone sound change. (The Buddhist and Jaina traditions did not claim that Pali or Ardhamagadhi Prakrit were eternal; had the Hindu restoration of Sanskrit not taken place, the terms tatsama and tadbhava, carrying these eternalist implications, would not have been in use today.) Sanskrit, perched atop the hierarchy of codes, embodied the classical hier-archy as a whole, and continues to represent it in the classical sector of today’s linguistic economy.

However, this system, as it developed, never permitted the Sanskrit-clad top of the hierarchy to rule, but only to reign. The popular remained at a stable distance, in its natural abode of speech, from the cultural, which barricaded itself away from the people by restricting education to an upper caste elite. Consequently Sanskrit never threatened to take over the hearts and minds of the vast aggregate of India’s various publics. Under the sovereign but partial domination of Sanskrit, the lower echelons of the formally elaborated social hierarchy evolved a sense of relaxation and ease which gave the system an astonishing degree of durability. What underwrote the reality of this sense of ease was the system's formalization of the extended kinship ties linking even the relatively isolated margins with the rest of the fabric. And this formalization was made possible by the cognitive architecture of a theory of heterogeneous cycle-fragments and time-regions, where cyclical narratives can link entities that superficially have little in common. Such modes of linkage are able to codify differences without generating a sense of exploitation or colonization; so at least the historical record indicates.

What was missing in such a formation was the explicit awareness

~ of the fact that the system was allowed to function by the lower echelons, without direct articulation in the system-building language Sanskrit, whose spontaneous assent ratified and thus validated the abstract unity postulated by the brahmins and their pan-Indian textual culture. That awareness explodes, together with other cognate realizations, in the ferment that one may call the Bhakti-Sufi period, with consequences that we shall discuss in the next section.


## 5.4 Recoding


Bharat, in the sense of the contemporary image whose content this chapter attempts to explicate, comes into its own in its mediaeval rereading of its classical content. For us the important point is that this process involved a relocation of the centre of gravity of the culture from the H embodiment of the hierarchies to their L foundations, from Sanskrit to the regional languages. This recentring makes the receptionist approach to histories and futures—an approach which implicitly emphasized their plurality from the very start—more explicitly pluralistic and stylizing, and turns it into what is potentially a tool today for a realignment of global cultural forces. This tool may be viewed as a specific type of rationality which we may call an L rationality in order to underscore its rejection of the technical or H-centred orientation characteristic of, say, the activist model of rationality.

If we wish to begin the study of this rationality in the most obvious place, by considering the developments in Bharat’s logic in the middle ages, we are not disappointed. The classical codification of logic in the old nyaaya-darSana ‘philosophy of logic’ stressed the role of the abstract end, presented (for canonical reasons) as moksha ‘liberation’, towards which all knowledge of the world must be oriented. In contrast, the reexamination of the foundations of logic undertaken by the mediaeval school of navya-nyaaya (‘neo-logic’) parenthesized the role of liberation (retained as a formal end) and stressed instead problems pertaining to the knower, the content of knowledge, and the relational network constituting

"this content (see Matilal 1990). Thus, the neo-logicians sought to situate, to contextualize, taking for granted the universalism attained in the original codification they were respecifying.

But the reason which leads us to see the official logic books of the period as the obvious place to look stems from the technical rationality of the modern period, which subscribes to an abstract, homogeneous conception of time and of the project enveloping all citizens of a particular period, and which thus leads us to expect that ‘mediaeval India’ would have expressed ‘its’ rationality—a unique animal—most clearly in the works of the practitioners of some academic discipline equatable with logic. If we attend more carefully to the specific indigenous organization of rationalities and knowledge in the mediaeval formation to which navya-nyaaya belonged, we must seek no unique key to an overarching rationality for the formation, but have to travel from segment to segment, remaining attuned to insights attained in each of them and listening for cognate harmonies in the styles prevalent in other segments. What we must expect, then, is a constant mode of stylization at work in all the styles but not in focus in any one domain.

Consider music, for instance. The classical dhrupad and dhaamaar period gives way, in the middle ages, to the khayaal and thumrii, modes of personal expression which thematize the personal elaboration of the classical constants, thematize the situated nature of the musical performance.

Or consider religion, a domain not unrelated to music in a period which gave Bhakti ‘devotion’ primarily the form of the public singing of bhajans, a repetitive musical form enabling the bhakta ‘devotee’ to bhaj or chant-the-name-of a God whom the individual must reach personally, not through the systematic machinery controlled by the priests. Here again, we find that Bhakti in Hinduism and the related devotional movement of the Sufi saints in South Asian Islam, as well as related devotional waves of that period which gave rise to Sikhism and other fresh syntheses, seek to situate and contextualize the universal message vis-a-vis the individual's active and immediate apprehensions of its reality in his or her concrete life.

Or let us turn to the origins of literature in the popular recodi-fication of the Ramayana and the Mahabharata in the middle ages. Again, we find that the process seeks to situate the trans-regional epics (which themselves had been synthetic appropriations Sanskritizing a variety of local traditions) in regional contexts; that this situating sidelines the Sanskrit language and its vast inter-textuality in order to profile the literary bases of the regional languages;' and that in this period the epics become the principal religious texts for general use, supplanting the shaastras mediated by the priests.

In all these domains, it is clear that the mediaeval realignment of factors situates and contextualizes the classical material in a post-classical rereading by regional publics beginning to define them-selves regionally and contextually, and that this rereading defuses the older power of Sanskrit itself and the inter-textual unity it had imposed on the cultural and intellectual endeavour of classical Bharat. As a consequence of the mediaeval realignment, the bottom line—public generalizability of the content of high culture in a period of wider dissemination—begins to determine the shape of culture explicitly. Once representation is thus made accountable to regional publics and is made to speak their languages, once the necessity of retelling the systematic shaastras in narrative form for public reception modifies the phenomenology of the shaastras themselves for post-lapsarian, latter-day mortals, we have entered the proto-modern period in the sense of encountering a fully articulated universality which is self-consciously post-classical, posterior to and translative of a classical base, and thus in principle capable of dialogue with other proto-modern or translative post-classicalities. It is a universality, for it undertakes to make the classical core of culture directly available to the communities through a narrativization capable of reaching all members; a collective whose style sustains such a universality eventually deconfines its modernity in the manner alluded to in chapter 4, in terms of a real or virtual ‘revolutionary’ moment at which this social style origi-nates; it is the Bhakti-Sufi breakthrough that marks this moment for the communities of Bharat. The core content of that break-through was a successful renarration of the classical epics into popular regional languages; this recoding, as indicated above, co-evolved with other thematizations of the ordinary personal context of a normal, situated existence.

The form of the recoding which thus set the style for Bharat’s modernity was emphatically oral and reception-oriented. The rhythms of the verse renderings of the epics into regional languages characterized the aesthetics of this enterprise: in many areas,

"fragments of and works based on these versifications were sung and served to congregate the people into a public capable of cognitively focusing on these auditory texts and integrating them, through conversational listening, into a broader discourse. The music served also to relax the public and enabled their authentic selves, at ease (a crucial term, related to pleasure in our account), to receive the specific universality that was Bharat. Here again, the rationality immanent in the way the collectivity was held together was a situative, diversifying, L-oriented form of rationality. It presupposed the availability of some classical H codification which the L-speaking communities recoded and actively received in a manner of their own choosing.

So far, the narrative had assumed that the relevant H codification was the Hindu structure embodied in the Sanskrit epics. Recall, from our discussion of discourse reception in chapter 2, that a single L can pair up with a plural H. In the present case, mediaeval Bharat clearly had a Persian-mediated Arabic component in the H systems that most of the regional Ls were coupled with. It is well known that the availability of Islam in the H religious corpus was an important factor in giving the Bhakti-Sufi synthesis at the popular level the specific syncretic shape that one observes. How-ever, in the absence of old popular regional traditions of the type that the Sanskritized epics had remained in a dialogical relation with, the Islamic cultural narrative did not get renarrated and resituated in any mediaeval popularizations. The impact of Islam appears on the whole to have been more indirect. Its equalitarian social vision and emphatically monotheistic devotional practices seem to have decisively influenced the mediaeval recoding of classical Bharat’s codes, a fact which needs to be systematically charted over the visual-artistic, musical, poetic and juridico-administrative domains of social representation in order to be grasped as a case of discourse reception—a task which lies far beyond our scope here, and unfortunately has not yet been under-taken by others. For our purposes, we must confine ourselves to noting that the L-oriented rationality of mediaeval Bharat defined the regional contexts in which the classics were being resituated in terms that brought Muslim and Hindu elements together, in com-binations that one can only hope to disentangle after the present generation of historiographers have been able to consolidate their findings. But this is not a crucial problem for our overall analysis. For the Islamic cultural formation also exhibited the features of greatest concern to us—a stylistic distance between the classical Arabic of the scriptures and the linguistic currency of this or that territory conquered by the faithful, a fascination (already available in the Koran) with the cycles of natural processes as manifestations of the ways of God and therefore a heterogeneous conception of time, and a natural inclination towards stylization as a way of coping with plurality. Islam did not change FESHified Asia, but modulated the regional Formal Elaborations in various ways which a more complete account will need to chart in some detail. This was as true in South Asia as it was in Indonesia, for example. Bharat’s encounter with successive waves of Islam occasioned plenty of social learning and helped crystallize the receptionist


