# Introduction

## 0.1 Content

What is involved in the truism that words and sentences are linguistic forms that have meaning whereas the spoken sounds or written letters that make up words do not? It is necessary to raise this question if one wants a systematic set of answers to questions about meaning, at the level of precision at which many thinkers prefer to speak of Expression and Content. Substituting these words for the possibly more easily misunderstood and multivalent terms Form and Meaning, we are asking, then, what we learn about the expression-content relation when we notice that sentences and the words they consist of are expressions that have content but that the sounds or letters that words consist of are expression units and yet have no content.

A relatively non-technical answer to this question, an answer whose correctness is so obvious that any reasonable linguistics has to be able to find a way to preserve it, is that you can translate a word or a sentence from one language to another and claim to preserve the content as you do so, for that is what translation does, whereas you cannot translate a sound or a letter as such.

We become technical when we construct a discipline, called semantics, which deals with word meanings and how they systematically combine to yield sentence meanings. But this technicality immediately costs us the simplicity of the pre-theoretical answer we started with. For semantics, especially in its recent reincarnation as formal semantics, works very closely with syntax, and shares the handicap of being unable to deal with entities larger than a sentence. Such entities, i.e., texts or discourses or documents or conversations (notice the various ways one conceives of multi-sentential entities), can be translated and are therefore endowed with meaning or content preservable under translation. But the methods of syntax on the expression plane and semantics on the content plane cannot be extended to the study of large expression-units or of their content. Thus semantics cannot be said to encompass linguistic content in its entirety. Nobody doubts that the sentences in a text or conversation contribute separately to the meaning of the whole, and that the way these contributions combine to form the total content obeys laws of some sort. But the little that is known about these laws does not seem to belong to the discipline of semantics which interrelates sentence meaning and word meaning. It belongs to an ill-defined region where emergent disciplines such as pragmatics, stylistics, semiotics, discourse analysis, etc., compete for territory, in the buffer zone between the grammatical study of competence and the non-grammatical study of performance.

Travelling in such a region holds no dangers for someone coming from the twentieth century, a period of plane hijackings, kidnappings, instant strikes, and other symptoms of the breakdown of sovereign states and the safe public spaces they had once promised.

In this book, we shall venture into that ill-defined territory which the great systems of grammar, literature, and social science have permitted to lie fallow as a buffer zone. We are armed, not with any novel technology or formalism, but with a new type of question. Our question concerns the use of English in India. We assume that, when an Indian says or writes something in English rather than in an Indian language, the fact that it is in English makes some contribution to its content. The question this book explores is: what is this contribution? To put it more bluntly, what does English in India mean that Indian languages do not?

Some readers may challenge the legitimacy of the question. They may argue that a language cannot mean anything. I will respond to their argument when they formulate it. I predict that they will fail to construct any detailed version of the argument. What we are discussing is, technically, not meaning, but content paired with expression. The intonation of a spoken utterance makes an identifiable suprasegmental contribution to its content, although no scholar has come up with any generally accepted semantic or pragmatic system that integrates this contribution in a satisfactory fashion with existing formalizations of the semantics of the segmental carrier of the intonation contour. Likewise, manner in the Gricean sense, or style as conceived in any stylistic theory, makes a suprasegmental contribution to content, although, again, no detailed account exists integrating this contribution with what is formally and precisely understood. In this context, it is obvious that the Englishness of a spoken or written passage in English suprasegmentally contributes to its content, and that therefore our question is legitimate.

Other readers may suggest that this is a case of biting off more than anyone can chew. When we cannot even make precise formal sense of a paragraph, let alone a larger text, so the argument might run, it is madness to try to make sense of an entire language, which is a set of all actual and possible texts and conversations in the language.

On the contrary, an entire language is a pre-theoretically simple notion. It is the constructs that the proposed extensions of grammar appeal to—a turn in a conversation, a passage, a paragraph, a composition, a piece, a text, a document—which fail to give us a psychologically real clear and distinct starting point for a research programme based on a Cartesian examination of common sense.

Furthermore, people have, though only informally, asked and answered such questions in other contexts. Lévi-Strauss (1958) says in the preface that Pour former ce recueil, je me suis heurté a une difficulté sur laquelle je dois appeler l'attention du lecteur. Plusieurs de mes articles ont été écrits directement en anglais, il fallait donc les traduire. Or, au cours du travail, j'ai été frappé par la différence de ton et de composition entre les textes conçues dans l'une ou autre langue. Il en résulte une hétérogénéité qui, je le crains, compromet l'équilibre et l'unité de l'ouvrage. Cette différence s'explique sans doute, en partie, par des causes sociologiques: on ne pense et on n'expose pas de même façon, quand on s'adresse a un public français ou anglo-saxon.

This important statement about what the English language and the French language mean will be left untranslated here in order to exclude those of our readers who cannot read French, as a gesture inviting them to reflect on the feelings generated by such exclusion, and on the deeper forces shaping the way a piece of elegant French looks in the middle of an English text. Such reflections will perhaps lead you to the realization that not only an instantiation of a language, but an entire language as a presence, can signify; and in that case you do not need a translation, for this is what the passage says.

We shall argue in this book that the meaning of English in India is not an independent referential potential, but a cross-referential or anaphoric meaning which depends on the meaning of English in its native habitat in a manner reminiscent of the anaphoric dependence of the meaning of herself on that of Mary in Mary blamed herself. To put it more journalistically, India does not own English and therefore has to pay the equivalent of rent to its metropolitan owners.

This is unlikely to be unknown to any reader. But the relation between reflexives and their antecedents is also a very well-known fact. Current work on anaphora in generative grammar has helped not by making people aware of the existence of anaphora, but by connecting our understanding of the phenomenon to other topics in a well-defined theoretical structure. The present work attempts to make a similar journey beyond familiar taxonomies of facts about linguistic power, towards an integrated understanding of these and related matters.

This book, then, offers an interpretation of the presence of the English language in India. It comments on the mode of this presence. Such a commentary is logically and methodologically prior to any systematic analysis of particular facts about the use of English in this or any other non-Anglophone country. This book does not take up the analysis of such facts for its own sake, although it makes occasional forays into lexical, syntactic, and detailed study of any linguistic level (phonology, lexis, morphology, etc.) of Indian English on the basis of contemporary linguistics is normally called socio-linguistics and is often seen as theoretically incompatible with generative grammar's methods and idealizations.

The book is organized as follows. The Introduction sets the stage by making some substantive and methodological remarks. Chapters 1-3 pose the problem we seek to address. Chapters 4-6 offer parts of a solution to the problem.

In more detail, chapter 1 introduces the socio-linguistic notion of diglossia (a systematic duality pitting H or High against L or Low language use) and the geo-linguistic notion of a southern and eastern Asian linguistic area marked by the feature of FESH or the Formal Elaboration of Social Hierarchy (involving the sharp codification of high/low distinctions in the language system). With this background, an outline of the overall argument of the book is provided; it is suggested that the FESH-exhibiting Asian area sustains long-term diglossic differentiations enabling it to domesticate an instrumental or Other language as a High (H) term in the system and to freeze it into this artificial role, at a distance from the natural or vital heart of the network that defines the identity of the speech community and controls the processes of normal linguistic functioning and change. In particular, it is suggested that this is the type of functional slot English occupies in India's linguistic space.

Chapter 2, in dialogue with insights expressed by the leading figures of one of South Asia's L revolutions, spells out the H/L relation as a relation between discourses rather than just codes and redefines the notions of H and L relationally in terms of a 'discourse

Chapter 3 shows that paradigmatic cases of earlier work on the linguistic and literary presence of English in India were based on a code-oriented, naturalistic theory of language and thus could not yield adequate descriptions of the phenomenon. On the basis of this sharpening of concepts and this critique of earlier work, it is suggested that the main question for research might be: given that both Sanskrit in classical India and English in modern India play an artificial H role, what explains the poverty of modern India's English (its lack of access to the creative centre of the Indian speech communities) relative to the obvious creative success of Sanskrit in classical India? An overview is then given of the answer we offer and of how chapters 4-6 participate in the work of elaborating that answer.

The answer is that, in the new diglossia that modern India has evolved on the basis of a historical mutation in the middle ages, the language-power equation has shifted and now focuses on the L discourse. Consequently, English, as the H term in the new diglossia, lacks the type of authentic legitimacy that the old H Sanskrit had in classical India.

Chapter 4 proposes that English is used as an instrument in the context of modern India's technologically oriented planning for developmental goals. It is suggested that, as in the case of the Constitution, this technical harnessing of instrumentalism on a normative basis goes back to the American model on which India has tended to rely in the post-British period. The analysis here includes a short account of the role that a self-consciously standardized English language has played in the development of the United States as a community since the 1776 revolution.

Chapter 5 adds a further parameter to this theory by thematizing the notion of modernization as public learning, due to Habermas, and by arguing that in the post-modern after-moment of modernity, modernization occurs at the pleasure of the public, in a sense of 'pleasure' related to the notion of the cabinet of Union ministers holding office at the pleasure of the President.

Chapter 6 brings the argument to a head and returns to the concerns of this introductory chapter.

## 0.2 Theory

The theoretical point of departure of this book is presented in my 1988 paper on 'The External Reality of Linguistic Descriptions'.

There I suggest that linguistics becomes a social science when we construed-as-a-mind not only I, an internal representation of L that enables S to use L, but also something amounting to E, an external representation which embodies S's awareness of the community's joint possession of L as represented in I. My 1988 paper proposes that for formal reasons S cannot construct or store a viable 'society function' capable of mapping I onto an imagined set of parallel I-representations, and that instead S allows a non-formal image of L, an external representation of the discourse embodying L, to serve as E. Thus E is the site where a psycho-socially real image of L is posited and imagined.

So much we take from that paper. Now, an ambitious linguistics which seeks to study this E while preserving some serious continuity with existing approaches in generative grammar and socio-linguistics may end up adopting the classical Prague School strategy of focusing on creative writing or literature as a mediation—involving the postulation and the stylized negation of norms in flux—between linguistic norms and social norms. When we decide to take up such a thematic complex in today's theoretical conjuncture, we find that this decision places us at a site that our period calls Discourse—a practice which posits/problematizes linguistic and social units vis-à-vis the viability that we call power as well as the memorability that we call literature. E must then be some sort of representation of Discourse.

A little reflection will show that the disciplines of generative grammar, socio-linguistics, and literary theory as currently constituted cannot, even if they are extended into new domains, directly cover Discourse and tell us how to conceptualize E. We will elaborate and show that the problem is real, and then offer a solution.

Consider first the domain of grammar. The essence of generative grammar is the work of systematizing intuitive judgments as to which sentences are normal (not, to be sure, according to some norm prescribed by authority, but in tune with the inner norms to which speakers have 'creative' or intuitive access). This method forces careful scholars like Cinque to fragment Italian into a colloquial style, a bureaucratic style, a literary style, etc., as so many different codes Italian₁, Italian₂, Italian₃, etc., which grammar per se cannot reintegrate into an 'Italian' space of judgments. Thus it is unclear how the theory, even after it is improved and extended on the basis of exposure to other languages and elaboration by grammarians from many countries, is supposed to express the unity of a language, formally, at the psychosocially real level of the image E.

Socio-linguistics is built around the work of contrasting people's relaxed behaviour with their beliefs about their behaviour and with their formal use of language where they respond to the pressures of prestige and power seen as the sources of normativity. Truly relaxed language use is by definition only observable when the users are not attending to or judging the systematic properties of their behaviour. Thus the properties of the most relaxed or 'natural' sub-codes at the levels of sentence or text structure do not lend themselves to grammatical analysis in terms of the contemporary paradigm. We have no basis (negative judgments, etc.) to make accurate projections beyond the corpus for these most natural sub-codes. Only those varieties which are self-monitorable and thus partly contaminated by normativity are so analyzable. Therefore socio-linguistics cannot assemble comparable types of linguistic descriptions for formal and maximally natural sub-languages in a language network; and thus we cannot hope for an integrated description of a variable object that would retrieve the notion of E. Literary theory responds to and articulates the structure of memorability whereby a community chooses to 'remember', or to publish and republish, certain language-stretches called texts, and to the sub-structure of canonicity whereby the community picks out some texts as especially central to its memory. Here the difficulty is that what literary theory can easily construct—a characterization of the literary archive A and of the privileged canonical sub-archive C for the community of the language L—is in general not coextensive with what an individual needs to know to count as a speaker of L. Such knowledge would have been E. But literature does not, and by the nature of its enterprise cannot, offer us any minimal, shared, community-wide representation (it is difficult for speakers of L to expose themselves to C, not to speak of the massive archive A, and literary studies help the community to deal with this difficulty, not to wish it away).

Let us assume that this suffices to convince the reader that our three disciplines—generative grammar, socio-linguistics, and literary theory—are unable in principle to explicate E, and that discourse, the site where people's minds may be presumed to construct E, eludes these disciplines as they now stand. We will now offer a specific diagnosis of this failure and suggest a way out.

What prevents the disciplines from articulating discourse as a field of practice, where people elaborate their images of language, is in our opinion the fact that each discipline orients its practice towards a specific counterfactual cardinal point, which we may conveniently regard as a regulative idealization. Generative grammar, of course, works in terms of the idealization of a homogeneous community of perfect speaker-hearers of L. Literary theory, engaged in the post-modern project of unsettling the canon and trying to get everybody to listen to everybody else, may be said to operate with a similar idealization of total expressivity and receptivity throughout the community. And socio-linguistics has long been committed to social action aimed at overcoming inequalities of linguistic privilege; this reflects an egalitarian idealization (see Hymes 1973 quoted by Dittmar 1976: 1). All three idealizations call for opposition—in academic analysis and social action—to the imposition of unity; but they fail to agree on what the crucial type of imposition is and how to oppose it; thus they end up yielding an aggregate outcome where unity as such comes to be seen as imposed.

It may be useful to state this diagnosis more fully. Generative grammar inherits and articulates the credo of all descriptive linguists. It therefore seeks to characterize the speaker's free, unprescribed knowledge of language, a projection to infinity based on necessarily finite exposure to the utterances of others. This strategy involves opposing any obvious cases of interference from prescriptive grammar or teaching, and also involves the privileging of speech (rather than writing) as the only mode of language use where native speakers can tap their authentic personal creativity in terms of intuitive judgments. Thus, the impositions generative grammar resists come from the system of written language, a paracode sustained by teaching and prescription insofar as children do not acquire the written language independently of such teaching.

Socio-linguistics resists all illusions of unity which stem from the spirit of grammar. Even if speakers think they speak in a certain way which they can make available in intuitive reports, socio-linguistics makes a point of eliciting their unguarded speech and demonstrating that it differs from what they think they say. Thus, where generative grammarians try to apply the model of grammatical description to true speech rather than to the artificial written mode of language sustained by the power of authority, we find socio-linguists claiming that the grammatical model itself bears the taint of artificial imposition of a unity which never exists. To the extent that the spirit of grammar is historically related to writing, the impositions resisted by the generative grammarian and the socio-linguist may be said to overlap. Both enterprises are trying to express the content of the native speaker's spontaneous, uncoerced relation to his or her language. But their strategies are hard to reconcile.

Literary theory, to the extent that its affirmation of expressive freedom promises to help all speaker-writers to overcome the tyranny of all routine structures (describable in terms of grammatical principles or socio-linguistic parameters), must be said to resist the imposition of any 'ordinary' or 'normal' order of language norms. The vision of this tyranny seems to have roots in the old adversary, the elite-imposed standard written code. But the rebellion of the modern artist and its theoretical articulation in literary studies are directed against not just elite norms, but the notion of norm itself. Consequently this form of resistance, again, fails to coincide or fruitfully converge with the grammarian's or socio-linguist's programmes of resistance against the artificial imposition of unity, although all three articulations start with the same original idea of resisting the hegemony of a written standard imposed by elite authority in the form of prescriptive grammar.

Digging a bit deeper, we might say that each of the resistance programmes is led by its detailed articulation to detect in the other programmes some residue of the old hegemony. Literary theorists and socio-linguists find grammarians committed, through the notion of grammar, to an archaic sense of rule-governed order. Grammarians and socio-linguists see in literary theory an obsession with preserving some continuity with a diachronic literary tradition even if one perpetually 'contests' it, an obsession which prevents literature from attaining a truly synchronic view of what is psychologically and socially real to the ordinary native speaker. And finally literary theorists and grammarians notice in socio-linguistics a lingering absolute faith in the validity of whatever currency the social marketplace allows to circulate on the surface of social exchanges, a faith which devalues the validities that the individual attains in his or her personal, principled vision of language which is not totally servile to the behavioural or transactional data available to the journalistic observer of social facts. It was on the social surface that the old hegemonies used to be imposed most successfully. Thus we may take it that each of our three disciplines finds the other two harbouring some remnants of the old imposition of linguistic order and that this prevents their anti-impositional programmes from merging. Some reflection will convince the reader that this difficulty is not a political accident having to do with the personalities of those who run the three enterprises, but one that can only be overcome by rethinking the enterprises themselves.

The way we have presented it, the crisis arises from the highly sophisticated development of each of the three programmes. Each is trapped in the systematizations of its tradition of inquiry and seems unable to find a way to be faithful both to its discipline-constituting programme and to the need to characterize the image of the language constructed in the minds of its native speakers by the processes of discourse. In the case of each discipline, the current articulation of the programme has become so specifically committed to certain notions and techniques for supposedly resisting the imposition of a false unity that there is no authentic basis for a dialogue with other disciplines. An adequate rethinking, then, will have to address this problem of disciplinary overarticulation.

The issue is posed in a pointed way by Lele and Singh who note that various enterprises in the human and social sciences, 'in selecting an event or a phenomenon for examination[,] had left out many more that were vital for a richer and more humane examination. What was left out by one was often collected and dissected by another into yet another empirical sand heap' (1989: x). Their search for a way out of the crisis is guided by the hypothesis that 'the rationality of the dream of a human community based on freedom and justice is intuitively sensed by common people out of their natural sociality and social nature and is expressed in their hopes and aspirations." Their methodological suggestion is that 'in order to glean that rationality in all human endeavours we must re-learn to listen to the everyday expression of the ordinary speaker' (ibid.: x). In their work, 'rationality' points to the Habermasian programme of reconciling overarticulated, overspecialized and mutually deaf intellectual traditions by setting their dialogues in the ordinary communicative situation in the speech community rather than the setting of the scientific colloquium.

## 0.3 Method

Broadly speaking, we shall be following Lele and Singh's version of the Habermasian strategy. We take it that the core of their critique of the 'empirical' conception of the human and social sciences pertains to the methodological assumption, in all empirical study (even when it is conducted on non-empiricist assumptions), of the structural superiority of the inquiring subject's rationality to the mental processes (even when they are assumed to be rational and reportable) of the object-person or object-community. And this critique leads them to develop a plural and heterogeneous apparatus of 'listening' to the native speakers, an enterprise to which the present study seeks to contribute.

More specifically, though, our programme thematizes the quest for a community's identity in and through its discursive practice. This identity may take the form of 'E', an explication of the image of L. Or, setting E aside as a mirage to be pursued elsewhere, we may prefer to listen to whatever snatches of discourse come our way with certain mediations in mind. A community represents itself to itself via several types of mediations—the food it eats, the land it works on, the houses it inhabits, the machinery it uses. Some of these are closer to the 'heart', while other elements are treated as objectual or 'Other' to varying degrees. We are going to examine the way in which the speech network of India (which we may loosely call a community, with some awareness of the inadequacy of such a designation) constructs for English-in-India the status of an object, an 'Other', whose instrumental presence as a term in this community's verbal repertoire is an essential pivot within the current articulations of power. The hope is that such an inquiry will eventually help make sense of the total story about itself, the total self-representation, that this heterogeneous and pluralistic community gives itself at the level of representations of its linguistic identity.

The encounter with this particular subject matter shapes our responses to the Lele and Singh critique of mainstream theorizing in grammar, socio-linguistics, and related disciplines.

We would like to suggest that the overdeveloped technical apparatus of literary theory, generative grammar, and socio-linguistics becomes so relentlessly machinelike, and preventive of dialogue, because it forms a sort of war machine. It is engaged in a specific war, in each case, against some form of imaginary imposition of a false linguistic unity; and we have seen that the conceptions concerning such imposition differ from case to case, as do the forms of resistance which deploy various types of war machine.

Now, let us propose, in terms of this metaphor, that the war machines may be permitted to stay in place and to continue their war games, but that meanwhile, for the purposes of finding a peaceful solution to this problem of identity and unity which does not involve surrendering to authoritarian imposition, we should explore alternative approaches to the question of identity.

In a memorable 1933 opera tás̥er deś (The Kingdom of Cards) by Rabindranath Tagore, the completely codified suits of playing cards become a metaphor for the codified castes in Hindu society; an adventurous duo, a prince and his friend the merchant's son, are shipwrecked, encounter the strange and rigid customs of Card-land, laugh at them, bring the cards to their senses, and remind them of their human naturalness. The satire, directed against externally imposed forms of order, is formally parallel to our three disciplines' critique of imposed unities, and appeals to the same spirit of a naturalness defending its creative freedom against such imposition.

Now, if India was such a Cardland in the period Tagore saw and satirized, it becomes instructive to notice in today's India a very different and freely stylized Cardland. When you travel by train, you find Indians playing cards most of the time (well, maybe that estimate is exaggerated, but at least during longer periods than their counterparts in other countries); and in our ordinary lives we play today's games with yesterday's serious hierarchies. We were cards yesterday, and Tagore critiqued us in the name of a naturalistic freedom. We play with the category of cards today; this discursive practice places the community in a complex position vis-à-vis naturalism and its adversaries. To the extent that cards, and the royal hierarchy their codification mimics, are a metaphor for the styles of power, we have progressed from appearing to tacitly acquiesce in those styles to the point of playing with them.

We shall take the position that our culture defines its identity by overtly playing with the symbols of power whereby various rulers had sought to impose structure on us. It is in this play that we continue to freely explore questions of identity, without settling on definite answers. As long as the Indian community is able to play off the vocabularies of its English-speaking ex-rulers and those of its Sanskrit-speaking ex-ex-rulers against each other in a field whose tone is set by contemporary Indian languages, it retains its own rational agency which is only partly invested in running the games of these two (Anglicist and Sanskritist) types of instrumentality and which continues to tacitly define itself against these foils.

This practice of containing and defusing the danger of a takeover by externally imposed codifications—a practice that involves playing different layers of imposition off against each other and using this play to distance them from the community's 'heart' or 'self'—may serve as a guide to our theorizing. It helps us to find a way out of the theoretical impasse due to the rigidities of the prevalent paradigms in generative grammar, socio-linguistics, and literary theory, to find a way to engage in serious reflection on the discursive construction of representations of the community's linguistic unity. For the prevalent paradigms have been rigidly pursuing certain specified types of 'freedom' from 'external' imposition of codification, hoping thereby to approach the core of a natural self-organization of language. But, as Lele and Singh remind us, the nature of human beings is not just a naturalness, but a 'natural sociality and social nature'. One instance of this important ability of people to work on and socially construct the naturalness in their society plays codes off against each other and thus freely cancels out their history as imposed grids, without going so far as to permit Sanskrit or English as such to hijack real control over the arena as a whole.

In order to be able to speak comprehendingly about the discursive action of so constructing India's linguistic space, our own discussion has to develop an adequate apparatus for 'listening' in the Lele and Singh sense, an apparatus which can cross discipline boundaries without giving rise to conceptual oxymorons, and which can thus use all available tools to retrieve the full content of what our listening tells us about the community's discursive construction of its linguistic self-image.

If this book belonged to the French discursive tradition, or to the gallicisant Anglo-American jetty on which recent French products are normally unloaded, we would have relied on the images of Cardland (from the Tagore oeuvre mentioned earlier) and the proximity of the English word Card to the international term Cardiography. Thus, we could have situated our work in an innovative cardiographic socio-linguistics that would play with the playing card metaphor and at the same stroke appeal to the centrality of the heart of the community which grounds and warrants a distantiation from and simultaneously a ludic deployment of the cartographic dispersion of cards. We would have dismissed present-day socio-linguistics as being boringly cognographic rather than cardiographic. Such moves would have enabled us to appropriate socio-linguistics for the praxis of para-Parisian intellectuality.

But that, for good or ill, is not how we proceed. Our basic object of inquiry is the language, Indian English, in which middle- and upper-middle-class children who go to English-medium schools address their friends' mothers as Auntie (except that Indians nearly always use the spelling Aunty, which makes our decision to use the other spelling Auntie some sort of a statement about the type of language this book tries to use). We are dealing not only with the ethnographic contrast between such behaviour and the habits of British, American, Anglophone-Canadian, Australian, and other metropolitan Anglophone children (who would normally use either a formal Mrs So-and-So or a non-relational madam [or some variant thereof] or an informal first name), but with the fact that this tongue in which people tend to say Auntie is an Auntie Tongue placed in an awkward, instrumentalized position vis-à-vis India's mother tongues. As a point of departure, we have chosen a title for this volume which presents this auntie status for the language in India in the context of Braj Kachru's contrast between English, the worldwide Other Tongue, and the sub-stratum Mother-Tongues on which it is superimposed in so many diglossias. However, this is not how we operate our apparatus of listening. Hearken, dear reader, as we tell you how we already start listening the moment we choose the Auntie Tongue image.

Once upon a time, there was a nationalist movement in Bengal, in response to the decision by the British to partition the province of Bengal along communal lines in 1905. Two teenaged enthusiasts who joined the movement, called Khudiram and Abhiram, were treated in ways that shook the faith of many loyal imperial subjects in the proverbial impartiality of British law, a legal system which was supposed to re-educate juvenile offenders instead of killing or exiling them. Khudiram was hanged and Abhiram exiled to the Andamans. Out of this shaken faith came one of the many nationalist songs that continue to form the core of Bengal's musical archive of political awareness.

Ekbar bidaY de ma ghure aSi
ami haSi haSi porbo phaMSi
dekhbe bharotbaSi
kOler boma toyri kore
daMRiechilam rastar dhare
ma go bORolaTke marte gie
marlam arek inglOnDbaSi

Sonibar bEla dOSTar pOre
jO korTete lok na dhOre
ma go holo obhiramer dipantor
ma khudiramer phaMSi
baro lokkho tettriS koTi
roylo ma tor bETa beTi
ma go tader nie ghOr koriS
ma bowder koriS daSi
dOS maS dOS diner pOre
jOnmo nebo maSir ghOre
ma go o ma tOkhon jodi na cinte pariS
dekhbi gOlar phaMSi

Say goodbye, mother, let me go.

I will laugh as I put my neck in the noose

While all Indians watch.

I had made some bombs and had them with me

As I waited off the road, mother.

I tried to kill the Viceroy but ended up

Killing another Englishman.

Saturday morning, ten o'clock,

The judge's court overflowing with people, mother.

Abhiram is exiled, mother,

Khudiram is to hang.

Thirty million sons and daughters, mother.

Go ahead and keep house with them

With your daughters-in-law in tow.

Ten months and ten days from now

I will be reborn in Auntie's home, mother.

If you can't tell who I am, mother,

Then look for the noose-mark on my throat.

The narrator figure in the song plans to die the way Khudiram did, and is addressing his mother from the point of view of a son's affectionate exasperation at his mother's inability to protect him from an unjust fate as a 'reward' for his valour. His remark about—that he will be reborn in Auntie's home—meaning the home of Aunt Britain rather than Mother India—is a taunt expressing the depth of pathos by resorting to a wildly counterfactual declaration of intention; hence the jibe 'If you can't tell who I am, mother /Then look for the noose-mark on my throat'—a jibe that proves prophetic, for Indian English today is indeed caught in the stranglehold of its Western masters.

This song, though old, is familiar to and part of the normal upbringing of most educated Bengalis. Thus, the notion of English as an Auntie Tongue, coupled with the equation of Auntie with the mother's sister or mási role of Bengali kinship (and másima is indeed what Bangla-speaking school-children use in the situation referred to earlier), resonates with the old and unresolved ambivalence about our relationship with life-giving Mother India vis-à-vis our technological life-support systems associated with Aunt Victoria (who had been Queen of England and Empress of India) and with her equally prissy and technologically tough-minded successor Uncle Sam. And, if some readers choose to be fussy about the unrepresentative character of the resonance derived from Bengal which is now just a corner of India and to deplore my provincially motivated decision to generalize from Bengali experience to the much richer Indian mosaic, I will simply add that the need to relativize the Bengali beginnings of modern armed resistance against the British Raj to the broader Indian space whose dynamics ultimately led to another communal partition (including a repetition of Bengal's 1905 partition) and later to the economic and political marginalization of Bengal in the resulting nations of India and Pakistan may be seen as adding to the resonances of our Auntie Tongue image further overtones—those of the ambivalent attitudes of many mainstream Indians towards a Bengal which has produced both nationalists like Bankim and extreme Anglophiles like Nirad C. Chaudhuri.

To put it simply, there is no end to what you can hear if you can keep listening to the echoes of the sound-image of Auntie Tongue. But the title of this book relativizes this image to that of English as the Other, another powerful motif. Long before and independently of Braj Kachru's important decision to apply the motif of otherness to English vis-à-vis its linguistic empire, many cultural and intellectual circles had become aware of the haunting power and richness of the image of the Other through Sartre's renewal of Hegel's phenomenological journey of the familiar Self over the potentially fatal terrain of its hostile foil, the Other, and through Simone de Beauvoir's appropriation of and mutation within Sartre's work on otherness for the feminist project of analyzing and contesting the patriarchal code which constitutes Woman as the Other or Second Sex. Extending this use of the motif in releasing the voices of sectors once sidelined, there came the effective alteration of the logic of the Other in the work of Edward Said, who memorably described, and discredited, the great Western orientalist project of taking cognitive possession of the cultural territory of the Orient which it treated as a mysterious but ultimately portrayable Other, a treatment which Said identified as the discursive operation of Othering. Coming after this history, Kachru's use of the term Other Tongue, though intended to be received in terms of a transparent contraposition to Mother-Tongue in his discourse, could not help but function as an image already caught up, despite itself, in the widely known network of echoes from Hegel to Said.

To the extent that India alters English and makes an Auntie Tongue of it, it carries out a counter-othering, exercising a peaceful but effective form of resistance to the cognitive aggression described by Said.

Thus, listening is just a matter of bringing to bear on our understanding of the problem, and of the terms we feel like using in our characterization of it, everything we know as normal literate Indians, beginning with the cultural lore we share with people who are not official bearers of disciplinary knowledge in domains such as literary theory, generative grammar, and socio-linguistics, but of course not excluding such specialized knowledge where it becomes relevant to the clarification of our understanding. It is this attitude that keeps us free from the obligatory grids of these systems and at the same time does not take away our freedom to use whatever parts of those grids we need to use, whenever we need them, singly or in combination.

To the extent that this book belongs to one of the language disciplines, it seems simplest to place it in socio-linguistics of a certain kind. After all, that is how Lele and Singh want their own work to be classified. If I could have my way, I would have placed this enterprise—and that of Lele and Singh—within a field of macro-linguistics, not further specified, with the caveat that there is really no coherent sub-field of it that can be called 'socio-linguistics'. For I have always thought that only the rich legacy of the version of functionalism which the inter-war Prague School had been developing, and which to a limited extent has lived on in authors like Halliday and even Kuno, would be capable of carrying out the necessary integration of the social, historical, literary, and 'straight' functions of language in a bigger linguistics. To me, the failure of the works of Fishman, Labov, Bernstein, Hymes, Ferguson, etc. to come up with a serious picture of literature as a vital part of the reality of language shows that there is no valid sociologically oriented paradigm of language studies worthy of hyphenated association with a field of sociology that has produced such workers as Tocqueville, Marx, Comte and Weber. However, it is also possible to take the position that the primitive beginnings of socio-linguistics in the 1950s, like the unpromising first approximations of the historical linguistics of the eighteenth century, should be permitted to speak in the rough voices of pioneers, leaving open the option of enlarging the horizons of the field through dialogue with neighbouring areas in a later period. On such a construal, the term 'socio-linguistics' may perhaps hope to include characterizations of literary discourses and pragmatic systems, to barge into semantics with insights about shades of contextual meaning and to help syntax and phonology to link their theories of markedness with sociologically substantive notions of what counts as obvious or readily available, etc. This is as good a way as any other to go about the joint task of constituting the general flow of discussion which we are perhaps eventually going to call Macro-linguistics.

## Note

On the literary and historical resonances of the Auntie Tongue image and its role in constructing the book's approach to the problem of English in India, see the further discussions in chapters 2 and 3.
