# Introduction (continued)

1. we all get our act together and stop feeling insecure about disciplinary boundaries and paradigms.

On this broad understanding of the term, it is okay to call the subject matter of this book 'socio-linguistics', and to hope that readers who believe in the valid existence of such a discipline in the present (rather than a jointly constructible future)—and who will no doubt tell me, some day, what contingencies prevented their favourite authors from seriously enlightening us about the place of literature in the reality of language—will consent to allow the term to be used for a book like this. If they do not, then, dear reader, you and I will have to call our discourses 'macro-linguistics' without waiting for a future in which the disciplines have all decided to relax and talk to each other without hang-ups. Disciplines never relax on their own. People have to force them to. If you tie your thoughts into knots, others have to untie them for you, and you had better let them. I hope, dear reader, that you will recover from my preaching and untie my knots for me as well.

## Note

1. The transcription system in this book uses S for the palato-alveolar sibilant, R T D N for retroflexes, aa ii uu for long vowels, E O for low vowels, Y W for mid semivowels, M for the archinasal or nasalization, sh for the retroflex sibilant, a simple n for the palatal nasal in Sanskrit (always contiguous to either c or j), a simple r for the syllabic r in Sanskrit (whose syllabicity is always predictable), and a simple h for visarga.

The extra accuracy made possible by diacritics or a finer grid of capitalization is of no use to us; this volume transcribes very little.

## 1.1 Introduction

A serious formulation of the scope and purpose of this work cannot be offered at once. One would first have to clarify the nature and relevance of diglossia and other technical concepts that come into the picture as the book unfolds. Could we at least refer the reader to a systematic passage at the end of the book unravelling the puzzle, in the manner of a detective novel? A book written like that would be an inductive book, where the pieces presented throughout the book are all gathered and connected in a final generalization. Readers who believe such a book to be the ideal form of the account we desire obviously assume the existence of an inductive solution to the famous Hegelian 'problem of the preface' (which, for readers unfamiliar with it, may be redescribed as the problem of providing a summary of a book whose expository production process and consumable conclusions are indistinguishable for reasons of principle).

In contrast, the canonical naive reader holds that a proper book should have a beginning, a middle and an end. He or she specifies further that an academic exercise should obey the injunction that one should '(a) tell them that you're going to tell them; (b) tell them; (c) tell them that you've told them' (an injunction that determines the content of the beginning, the middle, and the end). Such a stand is associated with the view that Hegel's aporia is a piece of metaphysical nonsense, that it is always formally and substantively possible to write a proper preface, and that thus there is a deductive solution to Hegel's aporia, an ever-present possibility of a preface from which the middle can be derived on some systematic basis.

I will call these figures the Inductive Reader and the Deductive Reader—IR and DR, respectively. It is interesting to note that these formal positions are associable with particular views as to how one should go about investigating the domain of the use of English in non-metropolitan (non-First-World) countries. DR would want us to begin, deductively, with English as spoken by its social self, its true or metropolitan speakers, and then to investigate the manner in which this pristine substance is adulterated in the polluting contexts of the peripheral, non-metropolitan territories where it is used as a second language. In contrast, IR would have us grant legitimacy to the many transplanted varieties of English at the very outset, then examine them one by one, and inductively arrive at authentic generalizations about features they do or don't share with each other and with metropolitan varieties of English. If I find that I cannot fall in line with the inclinations of either IR or DR as to the optimal form for this book, this is partly because research programmes corresponding to those inclinations have already been tried and, to put it mildly, have not borne fruit, leading to the conjecture that one should turn to alternatives; and partly because, at a general level transcending the particular concerns of Indian English, contemporary linguistics invites and almost compels us to evolve a new approach to the problem.

For contemporary linguistics stresses the learning rather than the teaching side of the phenomenon of second language acquisition.

This means we should move away from the classical strategy of asking how England, the mother country of English, gives English to the world as part of the imperial programme once known as the White Man's Burden (a term which, some readers may need to be reminded, was considered acceptable in polite discourse a few decades ago); this much is obvious. A less obvious implication is that we must also move away from the apparently different strategy of asking how the various Englishes are configured and distributed on the ground in non-metropolitan countries—how they are given or available to the observer as phenomena. For even this strategy corresponds to the teaching-oriented conception of second language acquisition; what calls for comment is that here one is seeking a set of nationally differentiated norms for 'Indian English', 'Bangladeshi English', 'Nigerian English', etc., which will be more suitable than a metropolitan standard for the task of textbook production. If we wish to implement in applied linguistics the contemporary programme of focusing on acquisition as a creative and open-ended activity, this numerically pluralized study of 'Englishes' which merely distributes the old structuralism over national domains will not do.

What is required is a study which focuses on the moment at which a non-metropolitan community, as the maker of its own linguistic fate and its own cultural modernity, takes what it has been given in this chaotic mix of the colonial and neo-colonial offerings of English takes it and uses it. Since this taking is done by communities and not by individuals, a study which focuses on taking rather than receiving will naturally ask how the non-metropolitan communities construct the Englishes they use. When we examine seriously the 'other-Englishes' so constructed, we cannot afford to merely compare them formally with each other and with the metropolitan area's 'English-self', as the standard terms 'non-native English' and 'native English' invite us to do. We must also take a substantive look at the way the construction of an other-English by a particular area, such as India, creates and sustains that otherness or auxiliary status for English. Nothing less than this will satisfy the requirements of contemporary linguistics.

Now, the construction of linguistic otherness in the Indian area is not a domain that academics have left unexamined. Especially Emeneau, in a passage (1980: 12-13) pointing out that Southern/Eastern Asia is an area where both status systems and diglossic differentiations of high and low vocabulary are highly developed, indicates a possible point of departure for our study. The passage is worth quoting:

> The high development of status systems in precisely this, and no other, area of geographical contiguities, large as it is and full of discontinuities, disinclines one to leave the matter at this point . . . . The fact is that we can say of the whole area, from Japan to South Asia, that it has been marked by elaborately hierarchical social structures. It was an area of divine kingships, accompanied in some instances by elaborate class or caste structures. That the linguistic status patterns are superstructures developing from the sociological systems is, it seems, obvious. To them may even be added another, and typologically somewhat different, structure, that of the Javanese high and low vocabulary; this too, with its Sanskrit origin for much of the high vocabulary, is related to the superimposed Indic kingship. If the similarity of the underlying social structures is the prime determining factor in our linguistic problem, the answer to the problem is in a sense removed from the purview of linguistics. And yet it remains germane to linguistic interest, if it provides part of the answer to what is in fact a linguistic problem.

Emeneau is proposing that both linguistic status systems and diglossias (high/low vocabulary differentiations) are associated with the phenomenon, specific to the Southern/Eastern Asian area, of what we call the Formal Elaboration of Social Hierarchy (FESH). Thus, status systems and diglossic cleavages symbolize social divisions which are so sharp that each section of society must formally distance itself from the rest. Such distancing takes the form of the linguistic codification of otherness, erecting sub-community boundaries within a social formation. It is this codification that is characteristic of the FESH-exhibiting area, which we shall call FESHified Asia.

On the basis of Emeneau's proposal, we may work towards an account of FESH which can make sense of the history of the curious formal object called Sanskrit; as its name saMskrta 'cultivated' indicates, the object described in Pāṇini's Aṣṭādhyāyī (more rigorously, pāṇini's ashṭādhyāyii; see note 1 to the introduction) and used by classical India's establishment was not simply a natural language, but one whose use constantly thematized the codification sustaining it. Such an account must include an analysis of the special status of otherness-within-the-culture which the codification system accords to such an object. Once we have an approximation to a theory of that sort, we can begin to make some sense of the role of English in our sub-domain of FESHified Asia, namely India.

In other words, it is in the context of the systematic study of diglossia and of the related phenomenon of status marking that we can hope to put together an account of the relevant kind of construction of otherness and ultimately deal with that of English. This may count, in the eyes of readers who have some prior familiarity with diglossia and/or Emeneau's work on India as a linguistic area, as a justification for beginning the argument of this book with a discussion built around diglossia.

Readers who are not yet familiar with diglossia theory or the linguistic area approach to Indian linguistic studies may choose to treat the present volume as one form of exposure, albeit indirect, to those sectors of linguistics. We will try to say as much as is necessary to make the present account formally complete, and to show the necessity of using these tools in a serious study of the social scientific question of the role of English in modern India. However, clearly readers who already have, or who will take the trouble to acquire, some independent understanding of the literature on diglossia and on India as a linguistic area will be in a better position to participate—either just vicariously, as readers, or directly, as critics—in the enterprise we are engaged in.

If we wish to proceed on the basis of Emeneau's proposal in the form in which he presents it, the immediate task is to turn to the sociologist for guidance. For Emeneau thinks the linguistic phenomena 'are superstructures developing from the sociological systems'; one presumes that they should be studied in a perspective based on independent work concerning the sociology of such stratification, especially that of caste, a characteristically Indian type of stratification which manifests itself even in the non-Hindu sub-communities of Indian society.

But sociologists, ironically, tend to situate questions of caste and stratification in India in the context of the study of historical forces governing cultural change, including forces to which they give linguistically motivated names such as Sanskritization! Ever since notions like Sanskritization and Westernization came into vogue (due to the impact of Srinivas 1956), they have been assumed to be partly competing and partly complementary forces for cultural change in the Indian context. Such concepts are offered by the social scientist as a partial articulation of social events in the vocabulary available to those participating in the events, as an immanent account of the phenomena. What is happening is that the social scientist is feeding back to the public, with some refinement, the community's own semi-reflective self-consciousness about the aspirations that make it tick.

It is understandable that social scientists may want to do this. One expects them to incorporate such higher journalism into serious theorizing. And it is understandable that socio-linguistics, which in any case normally accepts the material proffered by social scientists, should be especially willing to go along with a Westernization-Sanskritization dichotomy in the analysis of processes of socio-linguistic change in at least modern India. For this is a case where the received wisdom of micro or core linguistics in India leads us to tell the same story, placing the socio-linguist in the happy position of being able to record a case where social scientists and linguists, working independently, seem to have arrived at a consensus.

Let us rehearse the story from the linguistic viewpoint to get the standard outline straight. Consider a modern Indian language. It does not really matter whether one is dealing with an Indo-Aryan (or Indic) language, which belongs to the stream of linguistic flux that included Sanskrit as a codified variant of Old Indo-Aryan (the linguist's circumspect way of saying that modern Indic or 'New Indo-Aryan' languages claim Sanskrit as their ancestor at the level of popular discourse about linguistic descent, a claim which linguists essentially endorse), or with a language belonging to the Dravidian, the Austro-Asiatic, or the Tibeto-Burman family. Any modern Indian language L, to the extent that its literate speakers use it or intend to use it some day for a full range of functions in modern life, has a stratified vocabulary, built around the core of L's 'own' or (as linguists prefer to say) 'native' words, and including also a stratum of words borrowed from English and a stratum of words taken from the classical source language on which L usually depends. This source is Sanskrit, in the overwhelming majority of cases. Items taken from it are normally described as tatsama words, words which are sama or the 'same' as tat, 'that'—a description to which we shall return.

Other vocabulary strata do exist, of course. L may, if it is Indo-Aryan, be replete with borrowings from Austro-Asiatic, Dravidian, and Tibeto-Burman. And, regardless of its affiliation, L is almost bound to have Perso-Arabic and Portuguese loanwords. But borrowing from English, taking new words (unfamiliar in L) from Sanskrit, and creating new combinations of Sanskritic elements are the major strategies of lexical innovation which L makes available to all its literate users in contemporary India. This is a fact about morphological productivity in L; thus, linguists can state it without getting involved in boundary disputes with social scientists.

Armed with this linguistically motivated identification of the deployment of Sanskrit and the deployment of English as the two major lexical innovation strategies open to modern Indian languages, our socio-linguists are apparently in a position to say, then, that linguistics and the social sciences converge on the view that Westernization and Sanskritization are two of the important forces driving cultural change in contemporary India. For surely the move we have made here, of equating 'Westernization' at the social level and 'borrowing from English' in linguistic analysis, is an obvious one and may be accepted without comment. Nobody would dream of challenging the accuracy of such a characterization of our socio-linguistic reality today, one would imagine. The only question, surely, would be how to spell it out fully and how to link it to other factors on the scene.

It turns out, however, that the binary opposition between English and Sanskrit as actors on the Indian socio-linguistic scene has been problematized by the celebrated linguist, poet, social scientist, and translator A.K. Ramanujan. In his influential paper 'Is there an Indian way of thinking?' (1990) Ramanujan suggests that the use of English by educated Indians may be compared to the way the educated class in classical India used Sanskrit. One of our goals in this book is to take this parallel seriously and to bring the results to bear on the systematic study of the place of English in the Indian cultural system, in particular, and in the larger world of non-metropolitan speakers of English, in general. But, before we plunge into that task, we notice immediately that Ramanujan's observation makes it impossible to remain complacent about a neat bifurcation between the old forces of Tradition, symbolized by the classical language Sanskrit (or by alternative classical languages such as Arabic and Ardhamagadhi Prakrit for some minority communities), and the new forces of Modernity, represented by the medium of techno-scientific and socio-economic progress, English. For the implicit suggestion of Ramanujan's analogy is that the our unconscious awareness of, the fact that English-driven modernization itself functions at a formal or classical level in India, problematizing any naive polarization that pits the supposedly new against the supposedly old.

This means that we cannot pursue the Emeneau proposal in the direction that might seem appropriate if one takes the proposal at face value. In other words, we cannot simply accept sociology's Westernization-Sanskritization dichotomy. For Ramanujan's observation seriously problematizes the naive form of that distinction. We need to conduct the present part of our discussion in relation to concepts that will enable us to keep in touch with the point that the Sanskritized and Westernized superstructures both depart, and do so in partly the same mode, from some base which is less stylized. One concept facilitating such a discussion is our old friend diglossia.

When Ferguson first suggested it in 1959, diglossia was supposed to deal with cases where the H and L ('high' and 'low') varieties were 'the same language' and where the variety that had greater power, and thus counted as H, morphologically belonged to an older period of the language, so that one could say that the dead hand of that period continues to dominate and stifle the spontaneity of the younger L variety.

With the broadening of the reference of diglossia in the work of Fishman (1967), it has become normal to assume that a speech community may be both bilingual and diglossic. In the speech communities of India, it is English that counts as the Fishmanian H. This is a case of H/Foreign rather than H/Archaic; the spontaneity of L is here suppressed or held in check not by the domination of the otherness of the past time, but by that of the otherness of a foreign space whose global power English embodies.

The literature on diglossia carries the assumption that those who wish to modernize Third World communities (or other communities exhibiting overt diglossia, such as minority communities in metropolitan societies) must struggle against the forces keeping H (at least a Fergusonian H) in a position where it stifles the creativity, normally expressed through L, of the members of the community. To the extent that we wish to retain this assumption for the time being (perhaps tactically), we may suggest that, in an earlier stage of the Third World's modernization, the principal struggle was against the power of the past, and took the linguistic form of overcoming the diglossic cleavage within the language by sidelining the H/Archaic and pushing forward the L/Contemporary; and that, in the present stage, the main struggle is against the new type of power exercised by a global Other, and that it takes the linguistic form, not of trying to eliminate the distance between H and L in the diglossia in which English plays the H/Foreign role, but of ensuring that this distance remains stable. This involves ensuring that English stays in that niche and does not threaten to spill over into the sphere of what we may call L/Authentic, following Britto's (1986) proposal that L should be equated with what an anthropological account of the community would lead us to regard as Authentic. For such a spill-over might become—it seems to many members of the relevant communities—a threat to the very identity of a Third World speech community as a fundamentally non-Anglophone ethnic entity.

The rest of this chapter unpacks one version of the proposal that the main goal of the struggle, in the present stage of modernization, is to ensure that the H/Foreign code English remains an instrument, at a stable distance from the heart of the community it serves. This unpacking will be the first exposition of the overall thesis of this book. A fuller exposition, of course, unfolds throughout the rest of the book, where we take a closer second look at certain points, motivate some assumptions underpinning the account and some consequences that follow from it, etc. In order to make it easy to find particular parts of this chapter's initial exposition of the thesis when you are trying to link the later chapters to points made here, we have broken the exposition up into sections whose headings, if strung together, add up to the slogan-like phrase 'non-native English as an instrument for social change in India'.

We may tactically begin by borrowing this key term, non-native English, from the widely known paradigm of inductive research on the transplanted Englishes, as this paradigm is represented in characteristic statements like the following by Kachru (1986: 4-5): 'The colonial Englishes were essentially acquired and used as non-native second languages, and after more than two centuries, they continue to have the same status.'

More generally, we may begin with Kachru's (1982, 1983, 1986) 'English as Other Tongue' characterization of the role of what he calls the non-native Englishes.

Kachru recalls that the roots of non-native English lie in a context which set English up as a Sanskrit-like divine language: 'Referring to the Englishmen in India, two of the characters [of E.M. Forster's 1924 novel A Passage to India—the characters, by the way, are Ronny and Mrs. Moore, and the quote is from chapter 5] say, "India likes gods."—"And Englishmen like posing as gods." The English language was part of the pose and the power. Indians, Africans, and others realized it and accepted it. Therefore, it is not surprising that when a native tried to adopt the same pose—that is, to speak the same language, particularly with the sahib's accent—it made the sahib uncomfortable' (Kachru 1986: 5)—a passage of interest even to those of us whose concern is not with the colonial white man's discomfort, but with the fact that a distancing process continues to surround the presence of the non-native Englishes in their non-metropolitan habitats in today's world.

Kachru comes even closer to drawing a direct parallel between non-native English and Sanskrit when he notes that the colonists considered English 'to be a tool of "civilization" and "light". Provision of that tool is perceived as a colonizer's contribution—and duty—to the well-being of the inhabitants of newly acquired colonies. According to this view, then, language can open the gates for the emancipation of souls. And here we find a subtle parallel to the power attributed to the Sanskrit texts' (1986: 6). Thus, Kachru's approach to English is by no means out of tune with our project as outlined in the introductory section of this chapter.

However, we are not proposing to continue and extend his inductive approach to the Englishes, but to work in a perspective shaped by its results. This involves first noticing what sets it apart from other approaches to the subject.

The main point differentiating Kachru's paradigm from real and imaginable alternative approaches is his insistence on the status of non-metropolitan English as the Other Tongue in its host cultures. Authors who wish to make sense of this paradigm and develop more concrete proposals about this otherness must explore ways of conceptually elaborating the notion of Other.

Not all conceivable interpretations of otherness (or of any key concept, for that matter) are equally viable in all periods of intellectual work. An academic working during the fifties or sixties could have invoked Simone de Beauvoir's pioneering use of the Sartrean phenomenological variant of the otherness concept in her research on what cultures codify as the otherness of women. This is no longer a viable option today. Contemporary work in allied disciplines makes available to us, instead, the orientalism hypothesis which contends that the hegemonic Western discourse, by marginalizing or 'othering' certain non-Western areas, sustains a repressive intellectual and cognitive order, and that those who wish to challenge this hegemony need to evolve non-coercive approaches to the intercultural domain. While we may not directly exploit this option or its cognates, we need to bear their availability in mind in order to be clear about the horizon within which all contemporary research must function.

Let us return to our specific problem of articulating the notion of English as the other tongue in non-metropolitan regions, but now bearing in mind the intellectual style of the period in which we work. The task before us, then, is to provide a systematic account of the otherness of non-metropolitan English.

On the one hand, as we know, English functions as the language of a global power network whose power subsumes economic, military, techno-scientific, legal, diplomatic, and cultural dimensions. We may thus describe it as a language of power. This feature sets it apart from any language with which it is in contact, making it the supreme other tongue which may tend to marginalize, destroy, or otherwise harm the cultures over which it wields this power.

But this is not the whole story. In certain regions, non-metropolitan communities have had some success in restricting English to particular functional domains and using the advantages of access to English without letting its primary (metropolitan) speakers threaten the identities or interfere with the social choices of these non-primary users. In chapter 4 we speak of the limited role that English plays in such communities as part of our characterization of such instrumental use of the language.

We may argue, then, that the Power image and the Instrument image are both real dimensions of the mode of existence of English in bilingual repertoires. The question of the concrete relationship between these two dimensions cannot be pursued at the formal level at which such elaborations of the notion of the other tongue are offered.

To pursue that question we must turn, away from form, to the substance of the social practice which one may call the use of English as an auxiliary language in non-metropolitan societies. Once we focus, not on the form of English as the Other Tongue, but on the substantive question of what diglossic communities do with this H, we find that the most general answer is in terms of social modernization.

Thus, English is not simply other, but also crucially modern. We must try to elucidate both otherness and modernity in our effort to approach an understanding of how the dimensions of its formal role of Other Tongue interact in its substantive functioning as a modernizing tongue.

Modernity shares with structuralism and coloniality the curious property of trying to encompass its own transcendence through concepts and practices standardly designated as post-modern, post-structural, post-colonial. In our post-modern period, characterized by the post-colonial predicament and often conceptualized in the rhetoric shaped by post-structuralist discourses, what is special about our variety of modernization, as opposed to the classical variety that was at work before World War II, is that it takes place at the pleasure of the people. (This phrase echoes the standard statement that India's union cabinet holds office at the pleasure of the President.) This is the crucial point of our analysis of the post-modern moment of Third World modernization.

Our view, presented at some length with respect to India in chapter 5, is built around a general conception of modernization. We assume that the Western Enlightenment's imperial and neo-imperial encounters with other cultures initially impose their own style of modernization on all societies in a technical teaching mode during a first or modern phase. This elicits from each society, in a second or post-modern period which does not stop the techno-scientific growth of the first period but circumscribes its domain within a broader and more differentiated perspective of social growth, a response in a metatechnical learning mode. In so responding, the non-Western societies get back in touch with their own proto-modern potentialities and histories, a manoeuvre which is most visible in its regionalistic consequences, just as nationalism is the most visible concomitant of the first phase.

The general theory of modernity underlying this portrayal distinguishes between (a) modernity's technical-classical labour component, which involves the organized production and distribution of techno-scientific knowledge and requires some alignment between the mainly Western (predominantly American sweatshop-mode) production and the worldwide industrial use of such knowledge; and (b) modernity's personal-post-classical pleasure dimension, which points to the real or virtual moment at which the proto-modern cultural process of a community confines its classical tradition to the formal barracks and sets free the rich, informal personal creativity and learning-energy of the people nourished but not bound by that teaching-tradition—an epiphanic and utopian moment whose transparency a modern culture, to stay with the flow that is modernity, must keep renewing each time a body of insight congeals into an elite classicality of teaching and needs the popular anarchy of learning to dedoctrinize it and put it back in touch with its roots.

Elements (a) and (b) meet at the heart of the theory, in the notion of learning as the principal manifestation of the force of rational openness dissolving particularities and boundaries on the way to a truly universal community whose universality shall rest not on coercion by a unifying central enlightener but in the freely consenting convergence of many intelligences.

When we say that modernization proceeds at the pleasure of the people, we mean that the (b)-pleasure of the people controls the degree to which the West and the Resident Non-Indians who serve as its policemen in this country can inflict (a)-teaching on India, and that it is this relativization of (a) to (b) that is truly modern, not the pure (a) as such.

## 1.3 As an Instrument

We may develop the point about the pleasure of the people further by noting that non-native English is used instrumentally and asking whose instrument it is. Plainly, the answer to this question is changing in a way that leads to the short diagnosis that one at least believes that it is an instrument of the people. It is the shift to the possibility of such an answer that characterizes the post-modern period, even if such an answer cannot be treated as a rigorous social scientific statement.

English used to function as an instrument of vertical power, serving the purpose and intentions of an unashamed imperial master class. Today's aesthetics and manners make direct domination formally unacceptable as a matter of discourse. Thus, neo-colonialism finds it necessary to mask the inequalities that make it tick, or to pretend to work for a programme that will gradually remove the few disparities that are acknowledged by the system.

But this formal point about the contrast between the direct domination characteristic of early modernity and the mitigated domination of post-modernity fades into insignificance before the substantive fact of the ascendancy, in the post-modern period, of various types of regionality.

The regionalist forces, with their general thrust against all forms of central power, genuinely hold the power of English in check. They relativize it to a functional spectrum, at least in an area like South Asia, where indigenous languages are steadily growing stronger and where they call the shots in the game English is being compelled to play.

Having asked 'Whose instrument?' we move to the more difficult question of what kind of instrument English has become in India.

Paranjape (1987) has shown that the early history of English in India was marked by Rammohun Roy's request (in his well-known 11 December 1823 letter to Lord Amherst) for a system of scientific education and by the British authorities' decision to ignore this request and to impart instead a literary ideology based on the English language and on the construction of its glory in terms of a literary heritage. (Viswanathan 1990 offers an informative account of this history, but she chooses to tell the story from the viewpoint of the British imperial project and in relation to the field of English studies.) It was the literary presence of English in India that served the purposes of the imperial ruling class and its retinue. Making scientific self-reliance available to India was not exactly on their agenda. Indians who were initiated into the colonial space of English hoped to acquire the language integratively, as a badge of membership of the enlightened elite.

This past has been giving way, if somewhat slowly, to a techno-scientific and frankly instrumental present. English is still a ticket, but to a job market rather than to a cultural elite. One learns English in India on the basis of instrumental rather than integrative motivation. This leads to a relatively shallow working knowledge of the language. For today's Indians, English is a technical means to personal ends. It is held at arm's length from the mainsprings of their personalities and real reasons for living as they do. This fact is described by mainstream discourse in terms of the informal journalistic notion of 'falling standards in education', a euphemism for the fact that increasingly many Indians no longer care whether their use of English is 'good' enough to betoken any serious identification with the models they have before them. And yet English is an instrument that embroils many of its users in more than they had bargained for. While the forces preventing a total cultural takeover by English (displacing the Indian languages) are stronger than those associated with the expansion of English, it is clear that there is a conflict going on and that much of the content of this conflict has remained inarticulate, partly because intellectuals in (or concerned with) India have not yet made a systematic attempt to understand the elements of this conflict, and partly because such conflicts, being cultural, necessarily take place to a large extent in the national unconscious. The upshot is that the Indian people's ongoing effort to tame the force of English and to use it as an instrument without destroying the cultural environment has been associated with a big upheaval.

## 1.4 For Social Change

If we wish to be optimistic about the outcome of such upheavals, we dutifully give them tame names like 'social change' or 'transition'. Let us say, then, that English is an instrument for social change in India. The question is: what kind of social change?

There are standard answers, of course. The prose normally employed by those presenting these answers tends to speak of planning, development, industrialization, modernization, and the cultural and political elements of democracy and socialism associated with the infrastructural and economic changes on which there is a national consensus. We have become so accustomed to such prose, in journalism and convocation speeches as well as in academic work on modern India, that it has become difficult to produce and comprehend these phrases and to bear in mind the fact that concepts like planning, development, industrialization and socialism are different from each other, and that they are capable of denoting realities instead of merely serving as tired clichés.

Several responses to this predicament are possible. We can lament the fact that these noble expressions have become clichés. We may try to whip up fresh enthusiasm for these perennial goals, perhaps by blaming ourselves for departing from the ideals of the freedom struggle and exhorting everybody to return to that path. A more promising approach to the matter, however, is to ask why the rhetoric of classical 'development' sounds so false today, and to identify and strengthen the newer processes that are gradually superseding the old rhetoric.

When we pursue this question, we come across some immediate answers, which may be set aside in the present context. One answer is that the old type of development was a mindless and environment-destroying application of early industrial principles which have now been found to be invalid. Another answer says the dishonesty of the old rhetoric stems from the known cynicism and fraudulent practices of the political system which used that rhetoric. Yet another answer along similar lines stresses the consensus on statist socialism that underlay the theory expressed by the old rhetoric, and notes that that consensus is now globally dead. We would like to set aside these diagnoses (and the corresponding prescriptions to the effect that we should be mindful of ecology, or responsive to the potential for a new and principled politics, or appreciative of the goodness of the market economy which Reader's Digest had been telling us about all along) not because they are necessarily wrong but because, stated as they usually are, they make no difference to the structure of the rhetoric, but tend to be used in a partial argument that amounts to a call for a change of masters, a handover of power to the ecology lobby or the value-based politicians or the marketeers. Let us take a fresh look at the question of why the old rhetoric as a whole sounds false today, and continues to sound false when parts of it are replaced by a plea for ecology or the market.

The old rhetoric originated from an incipient nationalist ruling class which had a benevolent and despotic self-image. That class took over the state machine constructed in the colonial period of modernity and expected to continue the process of modernization without the distortions induced by British racism. But the modernization assumptions remained the same.

The social change being contemplated in the context of the new forces displacing that old order is not merely a change in the distribution of economic resources or a realignment of the energy exchange system, but a far-reaching alteration of the logic itself that determines what shifts are possible and how they affect the various balances of power. Thus, one is discussing, not only at the phenomenal but even at the programmatic level, a development within the concept of Development itself. The main issue is how to alter the style of functioning that was associated with the classical modernization programmes initiated in the colonial period and simply inherited and implemented, with minor modifications, after formal independence was achieved.

In this perspective, it becomes necessary to note and to resist the seduction of certain apparently radical theoretical options.

There are, for instance, the so-called left-wing options that involve partially reversing the standard priorities of development. But even a cursory glance at typical proposals emanating from this counter-establishment—at least in the domain of language—reveals that the Left has been offering a populist programme of handing over the once-evil throne to elements truly representing the people. Such a transfer of power, the programme says, will turn the throne into a good and transient (self-abolishing) state machine capable of disseminating desirable values.

This apparently radical programme actually shares with the now prevalent bourgeois programme the same assumptions about the nature of power. The shared theory rests on an idealization in which a throne—seen as good or as evil depending on whether it serves the interests one identifies with—formally precedes and produces its citizenry, i.e., gives its subjects the identity of citizens, grants them such rights as representative government and freedom of speech and association, and in general makes their existence possible. The Left assumes that, after the proposed takeover by popular and democratic forces (an alliance controlled by the Left), the state will continue the necessary evil practice of alienating the man in the street from the overall macro-rationality of material and cultural production. But one hopes that, under the benevolent and theoretically sound guidance of the Left and fellow-traveller parties, this state will educate its citizens towards the privilege of that political maturity which permits the state to wither away.

This type of thinking has become out of date not just because of developments in theory or on the international scene, but because the practice of the Third World subalterns it supposedly spoke for has moved beyond such declarations of radical piety. At least in India, the question is no longer whether the forces that control the state, benevolently and intelligently realizing that the state has been incorrectly allowing the citizens to remain alienated from the collective process, will take the laudable step of ensuring that hitherto neglected members of society can now participate in it. The question today is, on the contrary, whether the citizens, who are (partly unconsciously) aware that the state is an alien but useful structure which they produce and reproduce from period to period and whose routine oppressiveness (or bureaucratic stiffness) they continue to tolerate, will decide to either force the pomposities of the state and other elite institutions down to the popular earth (by refusing to play their formal game), or playfully increase and flaunt the formal distance between the popular and the elite styles of Indian discourse and practice, or codify some creative combination of these strategies of resisting the domination of the formal over the popular.

The assumption here is obviously that power arises from below. People in the course of their living spontaneously erect whatever structures they end up upholding or playing with. As Indian life gradually makes the transition from the old vertical assumptions about power to this post-modern perspective where the country runs at the pleasure of the people, there is a more and more obvious change in the modes whereby people represent political power to themselves, in representative government (a space of emphatic unity), and deploy social power in the space of otherness (a space of emphatic heterogeneity where each class/caste/gender/category concerns itself with the Others it must share social space with).

## 1.5 In India

If these remarks sound abstract, that is in part because not much work has yet been done to situate accounts of this type in a particular region. Such work would presuppose a shift of focus away from a History, seen as a 'realm of freedom' which has monopolized the attention of many thinkers in recent centuries and which has tended to serve as a site of often oppressive unification, towards a Geography that concretely maps the dispersion of efforts in different exercises of what is only conceptually and problematically the same human freedom. We need to begin asking such geographical questions as: Where is India? What is the nature of the practices that constitute this place as Indian?

Like the question about change, this one about identity also exposes us to the seduction of a readily available set of answers. If the standard discourse about social change has been the property of the official Left, we may correspondingly say that the standard attempts to specify the nature of India have been the domain of the official Right, including both the political parties standing for a reassertion of the duty of the Hindu majority to exercise their legitimate sway over the country and the cultural forces that see themselves as custodians of the heritage of India.

As in the previous case, here also serious research can only proceed when one refuses to accept those readily available answers. The fact of India cannot be reduced to the image of an ancient and eternal land which once cultivated the Sanskrit language and which has since continued to cherish a set of traditions associated with that language. Critical analysis of that image reveals a patchwork of traditions, counter-traditions, and discontinuities which undermines any oversimple unitary picture. What survives critical analysis is the 'staying power' of the civilization, its ability to last. One aspect of this staying power is the ability of the South Asian area to conduct its unifying or civilizational work in High languages such as Sanskrit and Persian, and later English. This area has worked with these languages during their respective periods of vitality, and has evolved a system of stylization which protected these working High languages from breaking down into mutually unintelligible provincial Highs and which protected the local and regional modes of life, including their languages, from a takeover by the hegemonic High cultures.

The reading that we are going to defend, then, is that India has held Sanskrit and Persian at arm's length from its inner being, and now holds English in the same position, even though it is visibly much attached to these formal instruments of its civilization. It is this combination of distancing and attachment that characterizes the Indian area, and needs to be studied.

This stylization, which keeps codes stably distant from and yet attached to each other, thus averting the risk of a breakdown and the danger of a takeover, is a characteristic that may be understood better if one sees it in the broader context of the larger area we have decided to call FESHified Asia (recall our earlier discussion of Emeneau).

FESH, or the Formal Elaboration of Social Hierarchy, makes possible the separate (and thus mutually protected) and yet related (and thus mutually nourishing) existence of central classical traditions in the High stratum of the cultural domain and diffuse popular traditions in the Low stratum. Explicit codification both preserves the independence and sustains the interdependence of the many status-differentiated participants and components in such a culture. Our analysis, based on Emeneau's, takes this explicit codification to be the mark of the Asian FESH area.

What we propose in the Indian part of our analysis is that there was a crucial period of incipient modernity in India's middle ages—a period whose indicators included neo-logic or navya-nyāya in philosophy, Sufism and Bhakti in religion and literature, and khayāl in music, all of them valorizing the epistemic status of the individual and of everyday Low existence—during which Indian civilization took explicit cognizance of the relation between High classicality and its Low individual basis. This shift moved the codifying centre from the High to the Low part of the repertoire (hence our term 'incipient modernity'). The new equation between the diglossic repertoire's H and L codes soon acquired theoretical underpinnings in post-classical Indian thought; see Dasgupta 1987: 199 for some discussion of this event on the basis of Gandhi 1984. That is where we date the beginning of the explicit Indian resistance to the hegemony of H which is picked up and resumed in the post-modern development of the development process itself which we have discussed above. More remote beginnings, which were lost in the many discontinuities of Indian history, go back of course to Buddhism and other ancient heterodoxies which started out as anti-classical and were later classicalized. Although there is no sustained line of descent from those early articulations of L-centred codification to the post-modern decentring of development, it is clear that the existence of articulate and systematic L-centred civilizational efforts in ancient India forms part of the evidence for the thesis that India has traditionally been an area of resistance to hegemonies—an area that handles all-conquering cultural forces (such as, today, English or the 'rational and efficient' systems of the market economy) by appearing to surrender to the storm, accepting it as H, and then diffusely developing L-based antibodies. These antibodies begin by weakening the H forces' hold over the population's minds (this is manifested in the form of the population's partial and inefficient assimilation to the norms of the hegemonic forces) and finish the process by turning the once-living storm into a denatured version compelled to sit on an ornate and circumscribed peacock throne and serve the purposes of the apparently submissive population (which sets limits to the power of H by the very process of elaborately and formally keeping it enthroned). Many readers will notice the way we appropriate Ashis Nandy's 1983 story of how the Indian losers of the battles win the wars by the method of partial and subversive surrender. What may need to be stressed is our additional claim that this subversion is made possible by the population's 'heart' working at the L level while its 'mind' tames and tackles the H system. Let us elaborate this conjecture at some length. In chapter 2, we begin to formulate the claim that both H and L are codes with associated discursive systems, and some consequences of this claim for our overall analysis.

## Notes

1. A more complex version of this argument, whose effect on the broader field of the socio-linguistics of English would perhaps not be substantially different, might rest on Gauri Viswanathan's (1990: 64) observation, made in connection with Alexander Duff but embodying the core of her entire analysis, that 'the effect modern [English-medium] studies had on shaking native [Indian] systems of learning contributed quite literally to the sacralization of its content'.

2. For relatively careful examples of such discourse, which go beyond the informal notion of falling standards but diverge in their analyses, see Nagarajan 1978, a classic, and the more recent work of Annamalai 1991 and Kapoor 1991.
