# Normativity

## 4.1 The American Turn

This chapter elaborates the proposal made in section 3.8 that independent India's adoption of planning and technicality as the path to modernity subjected its project to the gravitational field of the United States, the natural home of this century's technical adventure. A fuller elaboration, impossible for us to attempt, would add a comparative perspective and look at the way the Soviet experiment itself has leaned in an American direction, ever since Lenin invoked the themes of American management science when he argued that one should go ahead and have a revolution putting proletarians into power, because management science guarantees that the job of running the state machine can now be reduced to a series of explicitly statable procedures and anybody can manage the machine. We mention this angle—which our resources do not permit us to analyze—only to defuse the obvious objection that Nehru had been a fellow traveller and preferred the Soviet to the American model of rational nation-building.

Before we steer our discussion towards the language aspect, let us quickly note some reasons why American modes of institutional cooperation, e.g., in industry or education or science, could be packaged as management science and sold to such unlikely countries as Nehru's India. Perhaps the main point is that there were and are attractively explicit codifications, ready for instant use by a variety of cultures, available in the American system of institutional cooperation. The style of teaching, of leadership, and of public communication in the United States prefers to spell out what its British counterpart, for instance, tends to leave elegantly implicit in the background of understatements. Now, impersonal planning in the perspective of a society with an equalitarian goal requires explicitness for reasons of principle. British understatement and French esprit are elite styles sustained by unacknowledged systems of complicity and exclusion which have been systematically studied only relatively recently (by Pierre Bourdieu [1984] and Basil Bernstein [1971] and their associates in France and Britain). Planning cannot leave important decisions to the ambience. Hence the American turn. It must be assumed that everything important is teachable and learnable; only the American style makes available a body of doctrine and practice embodying this assumption through and through.

Turning from the context of planning experiments outside America that may want to turn to the United States for a model to the initial context of the country where that model first emerged, we propose that what is often called the American dream—the image of an absolute upward mobility from the log cabin to the White House, as in the prototypical case of Abraham Lincoln, coupled with the image of the immigrants arriving on the coast with nothing and working their way up the tough but impersonally fair ladder of equal opportunity, up to the heights of the pursuit of happiness—is the key to the understanding of the way the Americans make history, and that this understanding is vital to an account of what happens to the English language in America, and therefore to an account of what the American turn may have been doing to English as a discourse in India.

Accordingly, we offer some remarks—in sections 4.2 and 4.3—on the American dream and its consequences for history-making and language planning. Our hypothesis is that the way the Americans make history invokes an activist and not a patrimonial model of history, and that this is especially clear in the case of that culture's handling of its language situation. This hypothesis, presented in the following sections, is offered as a contribution to the theory of the American dream. We argue that the American dream in general, and its linguistic manifestation, should be construed in terms of a perpetual narrative subjectivization of the American revolution, a revolution which—perhaps more consistently than others—has invited such appropriation at the subjective level throughout the history of post-colonial America.

On the basis of this account of the American handling of the language, we return to India and suggest, in section 4.4, that independent India's use of English assigns an H discourse role to a certain extension of the American discourse described in this chapter. We then discuss the consequences of the thematic clash between the normative context of the Indian H niche and the quite different normative laws governing the composition of the American discourse whose extension now occupies this niche. We argue that the unsatisfactory Indo-American encounter at this level needs to be understood in terms of a theoretical recapitulation which picks up and continues the encounter into zones that are only beginning to be explored, in the practice of inter-cultural learning as a truly global project that hopes to supersede the surface globality of the communications systems. That point in the argument takes us into chapter 5, on the Indian style of learning.

The methodological status of the exercise done on America in sections 4.2 and 4.3 can be discussed fruitfully only after it is completed. However, to obviate some immediate misunderstandings, let us say at the outset that the account does not propose to generalize over measurable fact patterns, but to articulate the logic of the myths many people live by in their self-understanding. What we aim at is a semi-ironic presentation of the views of the world available in certain narratives or models on which many participants base their typical subjective accounts of the historical processes they take part in.

One might be tempted to designate the method as a phenomenology of the myths people live by, mixing the phenomenological rhetoric of existentialism with the notion of myth in Barthes (1986: 65): 'Myth consists in turning culture into nature, or at least turning the social, the cultural, the ideological, the historical into the 'natural': what is merely a product of class division and its moral, cultural, aesthetic consequences is presented (stated) as a natural consequence; the quite contingent grounds of the statement become, under the effect of mythic inversion, Common Sense, Right Reason, the Norm, Public Opinion, in a word, the Endoxa (the secular figure of Origin).'

However, the French notions of myth and the continental tradition of phenomenology are too classical, too closely tied to the non-fuzzy characterization of concepts, for our use. What we are trying to do is oriented towards natural or prototype-based categories, which have 'psychological reality' and are describable in terms of ideal types.

Our method, which approaches people's mythical and meta-mythical intuitions at a level of idealization, is complementary to other approaches—which may, for instance, seek to trace myths back to their socially real roots, or to examine the real behaviour of populations or their segments, or to study the construction of myths in languages or discourses by non-mythical agencies or forces. Such studies, in our opinion, need to be confronted with neutral attempts, of the sort exemplified here, to characterize the logic of the myths themselves.

## 4.2 Americans, Time and the Revolution

We begin with a commonsensical approach to the history of the United States and then successively refine our approximations to the reality we are trying to capture. Our linguistic point of departure is the fact that, of all the 'Englishes', American English is the only one with an institutionally canonized set of orthographic and phonological norms that distinguish it from the British base, so much so that some Americans say 'we speak American' (while no sizable body of Australians or Canadians say, with a straight face, 'we speak Australian/Canadian'). Especially in the American bringing-together of diverse populations for a civilizational project, there is normally a strong linguistic phenomenon figuring in planning exercises, only American style. We know the pilgrim vision with the pre-Columbian backdrop. Today's versions—both idealistic and cynical—speak of races and ideas, and the apparent civilization-hunger—to the fresh and new notions which they brought from their right to what Americans think of as freedom. "This is a different sense than American history represents." Such a pan-American ideal type, the hook of the initial scene, the all-too-familiar continual rapture of an American order of language in certain American words that express the form of such notions in the United States. Such certain reading of American attitudes to the past form of such American style, perhaps of gradual liberation, may have arisen as new rights in the United States—a special American case of the pan-American experience. Today, with the melting pot ideology discredited and the Hispanic element consolidating its new visibility even in North America, it is immediately clear that such a first reading of the facts fails, even as a first reading, to do justice to the Latin American situation.

One way to try to face this difficulty, which no doubt leads to a second approximation only slightly more sophisticated than the first, involves branding the Romance-speaking conquistadors of South America as Catholic and the Germanic-speaking northern immigrants as Puritan. This picture squares with certain other widely known facts about the Americas. The elimination of the Native American communities (who used to be called American Indians before people became self-conscious in their use of designations) was far more systematic in North America than in Latin America. The Catholics were less fastidious about their tastes and mixed a lot more with the Native Americans, both racially and culturally. The Puritans up north had a Weberian work ethic rather than a mañana mentality, if we may resort to stereotypes (mañana is Spanish for 'tomorrow') which have some basis in empirical realities, and correspondingly preferred to bring more and more distinctly demarcated slots of time and space under their control. If we make the further assumption that the northern United States, with an industrial rather than agricultural economy in the nineteenth century and thus less dependent than the southern states on slave labour, exhibited the fruits of Puritanism in a purer form, then this second approximation of ours comes very close to fitting the major facts of the experience of the Western hemisphere as a whole.

The road that leads from these thoughts to the handling of language in the United States requires careful consideration. We will have to pay some attention to the steps in any putative linkage between this view of things and a theory of the language situation in North America. This is as it should be. Any attempt we make is bound to be tentative. But we must envisage an account that leaves some room for factors mediating between our socio-historical assumptions and the language story—factors that are independently significant and give content to what could otherwise have been just an accidental correlation between some linguistic facts and some socio-historical wrinkles.

The history of Puritanism and the American states have shaped both the experience and, more importantly, the stable mythical image of the experience of that country. Puritanism construes life and liberty as opportunities for a certain pursuit of satisfaction that orients existence towards a utopian future, and imposes on this utopia an exactitude (associated with the rigorous rationality memorably described by Max Weber) which distinguishes this attitude to the organization and use of time from the speculative utopias of the Enlightenment and early socialism which formed the background for the French and Russian revolutions.

Our main point is that the ideal-type of the early American utopia thematizes individual ownership and occupation of time as an element defined by social practice, and that this is associated with a particular ideal-type of history which we will now take up for discussion. This possessive individualistic response to time marks the American utopia and separates it from the scientism of the Enlightenment as well as the social-management-of-time mythos of early socialism. Those types of utopia remain rooted in a patrimonial ideal-type of history, while the American utopia inhabits a new space which we shall describe in terms of the activist ideal-type of history.

Note that our concern with history focuses not on historiography, the writing of history, but on social action as history-making, and on the fact that different social styles of history-making may best be understood in terms of different models of history. We are proposing that the American style of history-making, as one might call it, invokes an activist model rather than a patrimonial model of history.

What we are calling the patrimonial model presupposes the availability of a continuous civilizational heritage and thematizes present actions as actions informed by and contributory to such a heritage. The key to such a history lies in the culture heroes of the past. Successors today are construed as maintaining or renewing or reversing the given types of heroic initiative originating in that heritage. A patrimonial history is a history of succession.

An activist history, in contrast, is a history of success. The activist model presupposes a potentially heroic human nature and thematizes present actions as potentially self-confident, valid, and constitutive of a series of peaks leading to a future summation of present contributions. This model treats any appropriation of a past as parallel to the appropriation of other natural, including human, resources in the course of one's pursuit of success.

It is important to see that the contrast between these models, and between the corresponding social practices, persists even in the shared proto-modern context of revolutions. All modern formations tend to privilege some revolutionary moment that frees or releases the modern energy from some obscurity or ossification. To put it more formally, every modern society postulates some actual revolution, concretely (or some virtual revolution, abstractly), as the basis for its modernity. Thus our claim that the patrimonial and activist styles of history-making coexist and compete in the modern period, if it is to be plausible at all, must be spelled out in terms of a theory of revolutions that can make sense of patrimonial as well as activist types of revolution—despite the initial conceptual implausibility of a patrimonial revolution.

Our position is that a patrimonial revolution is one that unseats an arbitrary despotic tradition in the name of a counter-tradition of God or Reason, whereas an activist revolution appeals instead to the perennially available human values of social practice as the authority warranting an uprising against the despotism of some time-bound tradition. In other words, the authority for an activist revolution comes from the vitality of ordinary existence.

Our position may be illustrated in somewhat offhand way by invoking the standard images of the English and French revolutions. One may suggest that the English revolution was in the name of God and that the French revolution appealed to Reason. We are contrasting both of these with the American revolution, which did not appeal to any religious or scientific tradition for authority, but based its claims on a natural practice rather than a cultural theory. It may be useful to compare this argument with the traditional analysis which sees the English revolution as emphasizing freedom, the French revolution as an ode to equality, and the American revolution as a bit of both, stressing what might be called a decision to construe equality as a kind of freedom. Such a thematic reading is not compatible with the suggestion here that the European revolutions were more classical and self-conscious, and thus patrimonial, in contrast to the relatively humanist and self-confident activism of the American revolution.

A revolution of the typically self-conscious sort tends to root the self-image of the individual in the past whose patrimony it translates into revolutionary action. A revolution of the typically self-confident sort tends to prefer a slogan such as "Trees have roots; men have legs' and a correspondingly active present and future construction of a self. We are arguing that the American revolution was associated with a self-confident social practice which proposes that heroic hard work leads to visible forms of perfection in the present and promises the scaling of higher peaks, as well as a perspective making serious consciousness possible, in the future. If this is so, the American distribution of historical initiative comes out looking very different from the patrimonial model.

To see the difference, consider first a Frenchman in, say, the nineteenth century. For him, the classical age was the golden seventeenth century, in which Reason assumed the modern scientific form, which in the fullness of time gathered social strength and toppled the despotic structures of darkness, ushering in the Enlightenment. Thus the nineteenth century Frenchman need not, for the sake of his personal or cultural ego, take any fresh initiative. His task is to preserve and enrich the culture that comes out of the revolutionary past. This vision situates the main historical initiative in the heroic period and permits modern successors, heroic or otherwise, to inherit this legacy in various ways.

In contrast, his modern American counterpart who wishes to live up to his inheritance must learn that he belongs to a revolutionary present, for his task is to take the type of initiative that the revolution was all about. This vision also situates the history-making initiative in the heroic period, but the heroic period is the present. The serious American today must either be a hero or join some sort of team where heroic leaders will make sure that the enthusiasm level remains suitably high. Directly or indirectly, then, Americans must take the sort of initiative that makes history, or in other words must keep the American revolution going in their personal lives—aiming for success.

America's activists of the present participate in the perpetual construction of the historical self of the society. The patrimonial model, more relaxed, situates the principal historical initiative in the past and permits today's citizens either to dwell in the already constituted space of the modern system or to enrich and modify it, perhaps to the point of replacing the system with a counter-system. America, to the extent that it is an activist culture, does not permit itself this type of relaxation.

## 4.3 The Making of an American Self

This section first argues for a link between the proposed future-oriented and activist self-construction style of American society and the linguistic standardization practices that culminate in and are narrated definitively by Mencken (1936). This argument hinges on an identification of language as the privileged site of the social construction of self. We turn next to the processes whereby immigrants join the culture by acquiring Americanhood.

The children of the American revolution, we have seen, adopt an activist stance towards time and have a compulsion to take part in history-making. Activism of this type involves not just a personal commitment to the republic at the level characteristic of all modern societies, but a subjective identification with and re-enactment of the revolution.

Thus, the social construction of the subjective self of an American involves a unique consubstantiality of the social and the subjective.

Since hard work creating the activist future is salvational in the Puritan context and defines the self as real, this reality must be underwritten both by the subjective desire whose vitality animates the work and by the social project whose mobilization pushes the work to the toughest limits of human or workaholic ability. This dual signature, by the subject's desire and by society's project, must use a common normative language. It is at this normative language, then, that personal abscissae intersect with objective ordinates on America's Cartesian grid.

It is in the normative American language that one may seek the key to the typically American consubstantiality of the subjective and the objective.

Let us place the problem in a broader setting in terms of hard-core socio-linguistics. None of the other former British colonies that are populated largely or wholly by English-speaking settlers—Australia, Canada, New Zealand—has come up with a parallel, non-British standard written form of English. The existence of American English as a non-British standard requires explanation.

What we are proposing is that this phenomenon has something to do with other known distinctive facts about the United States.

In particular, we are saying that the American individual proto-typically defines his life ('his', since the prototype is definitely a male pioneer) in terms of how he deals with his possession and use of socially defined time, while this social definition itself, deprived of any pre-revolutionary traditional source of validation, falls back on the individual for support. This mutually supportive system of self-definition characteristic of the United States sustains itself through a circular public discourse of utopian validity claims. Public utopia and the private success fantasy spiral around the same standards, postulated as norms in a space of individualism shared by the private and the public. In the domain of discourse, these standards necessarily co-evolve with a set of linguistic norms, marking the discourse as taking place in a particular, self-conscious society.

Given such a perspective, one might expect American English to have evolved away from its British origins quite radically. What then needs explanation is not the specificity of American English as a self-consciously distinct set of norms in orthography and usage, but the fact that it has remained within the fold of the English language as an archinorm. We would venture the suggestion that the explanation lies in the fact that the American utopia, in the absence of a patrimonial history, has taken a naturalist form. This then leads the culture to preserve what is perceived as the essence or nature of English. Even the strong French connection of the early years of its severance of ties with England or the continuing cultural impact of continental Europe has not encouraged American English to borrow from those areas on a noticeably larger scale than British English at the lexical level. Of course the other mechanism—of the European substratum languages of American immigrants affecting the interlanguage stages of the English they were acquiring and thus ultimately affecting the grammar and the lexicon of American English—has had far-reaching effects, which have often been described. Our point is about the absence of large numbers of conscious lexical imports into the normative registers of American English from the European languages which the literati had been leaning towards in their effort to move away from the legacy of England.

We turn now to the way this model of self-construction has been operative not just in the synchronic living of individuals who are born into the community, but also in the diachronic life-adjustment processes affecting families entering the American community as immigrants.

The distinctive ideal-type of America as a certain kind of melting pot of immigrants represents Americanhood as a status which an immigrant family acquires and which every generation has to reacquire. This melting pot image has functioned as an assimilative metaphor and is held responsible for producing, in principle, the sort of homogeneity that was presupposed by the revolution's conflation of equality and freedom, discussed above. Although the melting pot ideal-type, which once fed the ideological apparatus directly, is now supposedly discredited at that level of operative myths, it is still true that conformity to the community's speech norms, and—ever since literacy became standard—acceptance of the discursive and developmental norms embodied in the community's public schools, have been consistently high on the list of criteria for prototypical membership in the American community.

A set of norms represented as a universally acquirable mark of membership in an open society invites explicit standardization efforts for obvious reasons. This has been a thematically significant basis for the early application of rationality canons to the written standard variety of American English, making it a case of language planning that started even earlier than the Eastern European cases, also associated with nationalist enlightenments, that are taken to be paradigm cases in the theory of language planning.

Noting that the democratic aspiration for equality has shaped the long-term agenda of the American project, motivating such moves as programmes for increasing the education-linked upward mobility of the poor, one might ask if this aspiration has been an independent force fuelling the standardization and dearistocratization of language and other cultural structures made available in the American educational system. As a step towards an answer, we may observe that culturally diverse immigrants were not part of the acknowledged scene or the articulate agenda in the 1770s. The non-Anglophone or non-white immigrants played no role in principle in the formal separation from Britain. Thus it is clear that democracy has had a longer institutional history than plurality in the United States. However, when one considers the cathartic moment that the question of whether the American success narrative is open to racially and culturally non-core entrants becomes an American issue which conflates, in a distinctive hybrid, the otherwise separable questions of the Enlightenment's democratic openness to the poor and the New World's neo-foundationist openness to all comers.

Democracy and the New World, then, fuse into an intriguing utopia with a distinctively American spelling; with the eudaemonistic element in mind, let us propose the quirky spelling Eutopia to encode the specificity of the American project. It is into this Eutopia, then, that one must get oneself initiated in order to count as an American. And, in the classical formative period of this Eutopia, acceptance of the shape of linguistic normativity in American speech and writing counted as a prototypical badge of membership.

That linguistic work, has been part of the construction of the core content of the American identity to which one must pledge some sort of allegiance. However, some readers may question our construal. Today's Lebanonization of America, dividing the pie according to proportion has cooled down. Morrison has put Black American writing on the world map. Some readers may feel that this applies only to an earlier period.

Their narrative prose framework, and the diction of what they say contains Standard American English, even if it slightly reshapes these norms. Such upheavals represent the latest generation of the revolution, which is a continuous labour.

It may be true that this surface differentiation reflects a deeper urge to rethink the American heritage. But even such an urge operates within the activist paradigm. What seems to be at work is a realization, on the part of the vanguard of today's cultural figures, that it was a mistake to relate the American identity exclusively to a European background which one may or may not disown, and that a brave and free modernity (in what the American national anthem calls 'the land of the free and the home of the brave') must come to terms with a multi-racial repertoire of backgrounds in the nation's heterogeneous past. But such a realization indicates that the culture feels strong enough, in its activist independence, to stop disowning a particular (European) background. The culture can afford to stop feeling threatened by the possibility of that patrimony overwhelming America's present self-definitional activism. It can therefore openly welcome the diversity of optional backgrounds (not obligatory patrimonies) which enable America, without compelling it to follow any specific ethnic model, to reach out and tap the wealth of many civilizations with which it can (but does not have to) claim some affinity. This betokens an enrichment and elaboration of the activist paradigm, not a patrimonial, atavistic surrender to the past.

Despite the colourfully plural face of the post-modern present, then, we have good grounds for maintaining our idealization. We are concerned with the perennial (activist) basis, not the past-bound (patrimonial) roots, of the synchronic reality which is the American pursuit, a pursuit which has always had the form of a dream. What we have tried to describe here is the linguistic special case of a general American project—the public, inter-subjective construction of a viable space of generality which does not simply continue the stylized tradition of some mother country but which nevertheless does not leave local communities to their own isolated devices. Methodologically, our effort here follows a Weberian verstehende (interpretive) approach, with additional features outlined in section 5.1. This work reflects the assumption that modern societies in general, and American society in particular, narratize their developmental strivings in terms of an operative utopia that subsumes a set of transactional idealizations (concerning the optimal form of individual personalities, as spaces of effort, and of the terms on which interpersonal transactions are conducted) and institutional idealizations (pertaining to the optimal outcomes, in the form of sustainable arrangements, of optimal transactions adding up). These assumptions are in keeping with the broader project of this book, to which we now return.

## 4.4 India and the Activist Paradigm

The Indian state under Nehru proposed to import the activist revolution. This is a plausible reading of the concepts that we might call SPADE:

S for secularism: freedom from the dead hand of divided and divisive traditions whose most feudal or archaic features had been promoted by the tradition-bound patrimonialism of the British, and a new freedom to act as modern human beings;

P for planning: a resolutely open, non-traditional method of ushering in the new era, under the systematic guidance of science and technology, the explicit voices of reason rather than the tacit pressures of inherited habit;

A for autarky: to protect the domestic economy from a flood of cheap imports so that it could grow, coupled with the corresponding foreign policy of non-alignment;

D for democracy: both a solution defusing the problem of finding a ruling community that all the others would willingly obey in the polarized society of post-partition India, and a method of securing the open discussion needed for planning and guaranteeing that politicians would depend on the impoverished majority's votes and would therefore not be tempted to adopt technocratic, elite-oriented policies;

E for economism: a decision to treat the economic as the essence of the social, in tune with a 'common sense' ranging from the Left to the United States, and thus to attach a definite developmental content (supplemented by equalitarianism, thanks to D) to the formal notion of S, implying that the full development of a natural, non-archaic society freed from the shackles of organic inter-community boundaries would be the same project as economic development in some technical sense defined in the context of P.

That such a project would involve the Americanization of the modern Indian dream was inevitable. The seeds of this American imperative are already clear when Nehru outlines his programme in The Discovery of India. There Nehru looks at India's past with an eye on its technology, economy, and politics, and even sees the spiritual 'desire for finding out some kind of unity in life, in nature and in the universe' (1974: 156) as a factor in the overall social effort. Nehru notes that this desire is a human universal and then concludes, characteristically, that 'the search for unity in India [...] yielded positive results' (pp. 156-57).

It must be this interest in 'positive results', a major feature of the modernity Nehru represents, that leads him to choose to render (or to follow some translator in rendering) the Upanishadic keyword aananda as 'freedom', an activist term, where many translators cleave to the more normal contemplative diction and prefer 'joy, bliss'.

Even in these passages, free from the pressure to face the present actively and shape the future, it is clear how deeply Nehru and the generation he represents are committed to the activist outlook. We are not surprised, then, that Nehru should wonder at the vital energy from which activism springs and observe that 'among the people of the world today I have sensed this vital energy chiefly in three [peoples]—Americans, Russians, and the Indians'. The concern about India's 'vast stores of suppressed energy and ability' and how to 'release these' (1974: 56) leads Nehru to identify our main problem as being the omnipresence of the past, symbolized by such 'emblems of the past' as the 'Indian princes' (p. 507) who, at the time of his writing, ruled states such as Hyderabad, Travancore, Baroda, etc. (see also pp. 307-12). Such problems were 'due to this arrested growth and the prevention by British authority of normal adjustments taking place' (p. 507). This leads to the question of why a nation as advanced as Britain should have sponsored such an anti-modern policy.

Nehru asks and answers this question in a section that begins by noting the patrimonial, archaic character of the class that ruled Britain at the time of the American revolution (pp. 286-88). His point is that there were two Englands: 'Which of these two Englands came to India? The England of Shakespeare and Milton, of noble speech and writing and brave deed, of political revolution and the struggle for freedom, of science and technical progress, or the England of the savage penal code and brutal behaviour, of entrenched feudalism and reaction?' (p. 287). His own answer is that 'The two Englands live side by side, influencing each other, and cannot be separated; nor could one of them come to India forgetting completely the other. Yet in every major action one plays the leading role, dominating the other, and it was inevitable that the wrong England should play that role in India and should come in contact with and encourage the wrong India in the process' (p. 288).

In other words, the old England came to India and brought out the worst in India, stifling its youth. This is the damage that has been done. And when he contemplates the job of repairing the nation and setting it back on the track of the 'normal adjustments' (p. 507) which the British Raj had prevented, even a Russophile like Nehru thinks of the record of the Americans, who he says elsewhere (p. 55) represent the spirit of innovation. Thus, we have fairly direct textual evidence that the type of mind which oversaw the modernization of independent India gravitated towards at least a partial emulation of the American form of the project of constructing and sustaining a modern social order. Begging some questions, we will call that type of mind 'Nehru'. It is at the moment of Nehru, then, that India's nineteenth century relationship with the English of the humanities plus the ideology of spiritualist-idealist nationalism, gives way to a materialistic and scientific reading of the modernity narrative. The technical rudder of planning passes into the hands of a utilitarian communicative medium, of an English which controls the academic and juridico-constitutional discourse that defines developmental goals as well as the strategic and administrative discourse that allocates and deploys the resources to meet these targets.

Under the new dispensation, English becomes a clinical instrument of what is presented as a temporary operation—a special, state-sponsored acceleration of the developmental process. Nehru's state is uneasy and apologetic about its use of this instrument. We would like to suggest that it is the problematic position of the imported activist paradigm in India's cultural and political ecology that manifests itself in this uneasiness, which cannot be reduced to an avoidable trait of Nehru's indecisive personality.

Recall the assumption of activism, in the American context, that the growth of a viable social order can rely on perennially available human energies for action and public self-definition and need not appeal to patrimonial traditions. Nehru, committed as he is to a Pramatha-Chaudhuri-like naturalism—he wants 'normal adjustments' of the sort that the tradition-bound British, in collusion with tradition-bound Indians, were stifling (p. 507), so that India's 'vast stores of suppressed energy' can be 'released' (p. 56) to yield 'positive results' (p. 157)—must give priority to the SPADE programme which will cancel out the omnipresence of the past in India (p. 565) and put the nation back on its own natural feet. But, being in a hurry, Nehru is forced to import technology in the form of SPADE and the instrumental English language in order to hasten towards such a natural order. And this hastening is to be carried out by the educated class, especially its techno-scientific and managerial elite, functioning at an unnatural distance from the public—using a language alien to most of the population and finalizing decisions without inviting the public to participate in any debate. Such an activist elite, acutely aware that activism calls for a much broader national communication network for the public to attain truly self-definitional modernity, is structurally compelled to represent itself to itself as an elite whose modernizing mission is some sort of legacy or patrimony which is continuous with the imperial modernizing endeavour of the British Raj in the time dimension and with the global developmental project of the Americans in the space dimension.

This is the contradiction. Independent India has an activist elite. Its activism pits it against patrimonialism in its conception of the human world; it fosters practices of self-definition that rely on free, critical, and open methods of debate and learning. But its elite status, structurally bound to try to reproduce itself, makes it a patrimonial force.

This contradiction has made it extremely difficult for even the elite to absorb and practise any sort of coherent activism. Consider its response to the impact of the definitional discourses emanating from America's media and academia, and reaching us especially through the many Indians educated there. Or consider the impact of the sectors of our mixed economy that have been controlled or influenced by American business. Those sectors, spawning our executive class, have crucially shaped the urban Indian dream of upward mobility in an American direction. This multiple impact has not, however, been conducive to the emergence of even a limited public space within Indian society where social and scientific discussion is no respecter of persons and where an alternative critical culture can begin to explore the limits of our construction of India. There is no such space; the elite, for good or ill, is very much part of our overall Indian scene. FESH (described in chapter 1) continues to control Indian social patterns, and the activist elite simply functions as a caste or macrocaste. Here we see how the import of activism has failed to yield what Nehru calls 'positive results'.

One aspect of the uneasy status of instrumental English, and of the social bearer and wielder of this instrument, is its function of marking the alienation of the secular, SPADE-oriented minority from the communally polarized (or readily polarizable) general population, especially if we go back to the situation in 1947, when Nehru's India was trying to make an anti-Pakistani point about its secularism being the true legatee of the undivided Indian heritage of tolerance. Nehru could resist the communal forces only by avoiding populism or sentiment and confining his discourse to neutral, technically defensible considerations couched in an alien linguistic medium. The resolute avoidance of populism opened his work to the charge of lacking popular content and betraying democracy, the D in what we are calling SPADE.

Indeed, the feeling that secularism in particular and the SPADE agenda in general are threatened by what an irrational populace may think or do means that such a state cannot afford to permit serious debates in the Indian languages communication networks whose outcomes could feed the planning process, for who knows what obscurantist and archaic desires may emerge. Suspecting the Indian languages of harbouring populism and sentiment as their natural element, the state set up by Nehru (the champion of the 'natural' course of development) deliberately dishes out radio programmes and news films which stoop to the lowest cultural-emotional denominator to teach the masses what they may safely desire.

Lest our position be misunderstood as implying that a (counter-factual) political victory of the communal parties in 1952 would have given us a different linguistic scenario, let us emphasize that it was structurally given that development would have to be arranged, that the arrangers would depend on English-speaking experts, and that truly public debate would have to be prevented so that the state could arrive at quick decisions and swiftly impose them on the nation. Our narrative plays up specific features of what did happen (associated with the fact that it was Nehru and not the Hindu Mahasabha that took over) for the sake of concreteness, not to suggest that there was anything special about the Congress of Nehru that led to the developments we are concerned with. The activist elite of India comprises self-declared leftists as well as those who wish to restore the pristine glory of Hinduism. But we are straying into chapter 6. Let us return to the unsatisfactory import of activism into India.

As we all know, the Indian state was explicitly half-hearted in its use of English for official purposes. It did sponsor a division of linguistic labour in which one produces serious discourse in English and then pours the what-is-to-be-done message into the passive receptacles, the languages of the land. But the state did not want this arrangement to lapse into an obvious and acknowledged permanence. Hence the famous promise in the Constitution to phase out the use of English as an official language within fifteen years, and to enthrone Hindi at the centre and the regional languages in the states. Since this promise was as half-hearted as the embarrassed retention of English had been, those peripherals who felt threatened by the rise of Hindi found it easy to extract a counter-promise, first from Nehru and then from successive governments, to the effect that the temporary use of English would go on indefinitely (as long as some minorities continue to feel that it alone can protect them against the potentially evil effects of the hegemony of Hindi—that is, in effect, indefinitely).

This half-heartedness is a general malaise affecting the way the activist elite of India, acting through the state, has tried to implement the whole exercise of planned nation-building. The elite has tried to employ certain instruments, going through the motions of Soviet-style planning and American-style open discussion. The idea has been that instruments will speed up the process and that our acute crisis makes this speed indispensable. However, unlike the decisive and thorough acceptance of their respective instrumentalities by the elites of Russia, America, and China—the three model countries which struck Nehru as energetic—there has been no consensus in our elite over the serious use of social instruments to get far-reaching and quick results. For India has characteristically reinterpreted the resort to English and to technicality as the use of a High code and stylization, as formal markers distinguishing the elite's way of life from that of other sub-communities. Our elite has been as conservative as the social formation as a whole, and has treated its special relationship with English as part of its way of life as this way of life had been defined earlier, in terms of hierarchical categories, it has thus gone along with the entire society's patrimonial misprision of the activist form that Nehru's SPADE programme had sought to import into our culture. The resulting patrimonial activism has been a site of contradiction between activist form and patrimonial practice.

One way to state the contradiction is to say that independent India has assigned an H niche in its patrimonial discursive ecology to the activist discourse imported with the English language from an increasingly instrumentalized and Americanized metropolitan social order, and to posit a clash between the public norm-constituting logic of the imported discourse and the differentiated, multiple-private normative environment which provides the context for its reception in India. Hence the failure of, among other things, such supposedly potent culture-altering factors as the American media onslaught and the fact that so many of our academics and cultural figures have lived and studied in America; the failure of what one might have called the Indo-American dialogue if it had worked.

In section 4.5 we propose a somewhat more conceptual version of this formulation, using notions of teaching and learning which link these matters to our theory of education and language given in chapter 2 and to the characterization of modernity in terms of learning which chapter 5 will offer.

## 4.5 How to Resist Being Taught How to Learn

This section argues that the destructive potential of India's half-heartedly activist elite is contained and defused by the larger, critical but mythopoeic, learning process which has permitted the English H discourse and its bearer the activist elite to emerge at the present juncture in the history of our social learning. The centre of gravity of the learning process lies in the L discourse (a matter we discuss in chapter 6 after chapter 5 has had a chance to discuss in some detail the relations between learning and the modern or open society); thus, the sense that the users of English or H are autonomous and in fact play the role of true leaders of the social process turns out to be an illusion, though a well-founded one: it is the L discourse whose votes and vetoes determine the disposal of various proposals emanating from the H system, and the patterns of L even preshape the workings of H itself (in ways that are explored in chapter 6).

Recall that the L sub-system in a diglossic repertoire is itself a norm-governed discourse. In order to understand how its normativity interacts, in modern India, with the much more obvious discipline involved in our studied, careful, self-correcting, edited use of English, it is useful to return to the educational structure of the discourse reception theory given in chapter 2. The norms of the L discourse belong to the learner's side, and those of the H are characteristic of the teacher. Now, we have argued in section 3.9 that learning in India takes the form of a diffuse and image-oriented (rather than concept-focused) listening. It follows that an ideal adjustment between the two normativities would require self-confidence on the part of the H discourse. As we have seen, the elite is indeed half-hearted, and this fact crucially affects the country's balance of norms.

The elite emulates the image of an activist, naturalist, self-confident community constituting its own norms through free and critical dialogue. But it only emulates the image. The compulsion of sounding like a foreign model turns the English H discourse in India into a tense, insecure performance, pretending to be natural because that's how one is supposed to sound. That the elite must play teacher to the general public makes the whole thing worse, given the unwillingness of the Western communities of native speakers of English to accept the non-white Englishes as legitimate and equal varieties of their language. The Indian elite is thus internationally insecure because of the non-legitimacy of its language and therefore uneasy and tense about its linguistic identity; this tension is compounded when it has to play leader or teacher in the Indian context, for the ideology of naturalism (which devalues non-native languages) and the SPADE programme destroy the conceptual foundations of any self-confidence it might have acquired.

This diffident elite thus functions as a caretaker elite and neither wants to nor is able to exercise any cultural authority over the rest of India. It serves merely as a channel through which Western cultural wares enter the Indian communication network. For such a comprador elite even to change its linguistic status—say, by streamlining its school-family-society circuit in such a way that all its children acquire only English as a first language and pick up some pidgin version of one or two Indian languages only in their late childhood or even later, and by managing to persuade the white native speakers of English to accept the new Indian English as the native language of a real speech community similar to theirs—would probably not even touch the basic malaise. The elite would still be diffident and unable to lead, for it would still be importing and not producing the content of what it transmits to the L discourse of the general public. Thus, in flagrant contradiction to the assumptions of activism and naturalism, the H discourse in English is unable to present any normative system—it chiefly mimics the normative systems of others. The development ideologies our elite follows are imposed on them by the Western academic and monetary systems, not worked out and reworked as norms by the Indian elite itself. In an important sense, then, India has no elite or vanguard, no leaders, and therefore controls the pace and manner of development only to the extent that the patterns of our population's acquiescence in or intolerance of particular measures force the international development machine to follow specific paths of least resistance. Our elite teaches but, having no inner norms of its own, cannot lead.

Not being handicapped by the teacher's role, the L discourses function as an elaborate set of listening apparatuses. If it is the learning that goes on in a society that constitutes its modernity, as a Habermasian account would argue, then the modern or rational cognitive space of Indian society is located in its L discourses, and we must regard the artificial H discourse in English as a region of what a Habermasian would call systematically distorted communication—distorted in this case by power, by the exigencies of the role of teaching, of setting an example, in accordance with the norms of some overseas reference group.

But modernity and rationality are recognized as such to the extent that a community with these properties enlarges itself, through dialogue, towards a universalistic telos. A critical analysis of Indian modernity, if we wish to situate it in the L discursive sub-system of the Indian communication network, must be able to visualize the way this rationality in principle invites other minds—visualize the utopia of inter-cultural, global discourse whose general horizon corresponds to the specific contours of its limited, non-utopian present. To put it differently, if our story is going to say that the American-style effort to make India part of the modern world has not worked, and that instead India is modernizing its discursive system (and thus entering the world) in its own way, then it is natural to ask questions about how this Indian way is different from, say, the American way which we have discussed in this chapter. And this question can be posed more explicitly if one extends it to the whole world and asks what the nature of the openness of the Indian style of discourse is, what a world shaped by an Indian-style world-modernizing dialogue would be like. A partial answer would be of course that such a world would be relaxed, it would be 'cool' in the sense McLuhan had given to that term; but clearly categories of differentiation that crucially refer to diglossia itself must figure in a serious answer comparable to the type of account we have offered in the case of the activist paradigm of the Americans. So we must devote an entire chapter, chapter 5, to the Indian L style of learning and modernization. As we elaborate our analysis there, it will gradually become apparent that the Habermasian model is as difficult to import into a socio-linguistic theory of India as the activist paradigm was to import into India's developmental practice: our diglossic climate modifies such imports so drastically that one feels tempted to try to re-export the modified product back to the area the original had come from—American social practice in the case of activism, German critical theory in the case of the model of learning and modernity/rationality which we have taken as a point of departure, following Lele and Singh.

## Notes

1. One of most careful characterizations of this consubstantiality is by Tocqueville (1963: 1. 318): 'In the United States politics are the end and aim of education; in Europe its principal object is to fit men for private life. The interference of the citizens in public affairs is too rare an occurrence to be provided for beforehand. Upon casting a glance over society in the two hemispheres, these differences are indicated even by their external aspect. In Europe we frequently introduce the ideas and habits of private life into public affairs: and as we pass at once from the domestic circle to the government...
